AAS 010
African-American Culture & Society

Critical examination of the historical, political, social, and economic factors that have affected the development and status of African-American people in contemporary society.
AAS 012
Introduction to African Studies

Introduction to African Studies which will focus on the various disciplinary perspectives through which African society and culture are generally studied. A survey of methods, resources and conceptual tools for the study of Africa.
AAS 015
Introduction to African American Humanities

Introduction to the humanist tradition developed by writers, philosophers, and artists of African descent in the West. Attention also given to African sources, as well as European, Caribbean, Latin-American, and North American variations on this tradition.
AAS 016
Verbal & Performance Arts in Africa

African verbal arts; oral texts from different African cultures. Types of critical response to oral texts, role of oral artists, context and esthetics of oral performance in Africa.
AAS 017
Women in African Societies

Gender relations in traditional and contemporary African society. Involvement of African women in politics, religion, the economy, the arts. African responses to feminist theory. Images of women in African literature.
AAS 018
Introduction to Caribbean Studies

Introduction to the contemporary culture, peoples, politics, and societies of the Caribbean. Topics include movements of people, goods and ideas across the Atlantic world and creative productions within the Caribbean.
AAS 050
Black Popular Culture

Survey of the African American images in popular culture (film, television, comedy, sports and music).
AAS 051
History of Afro American Dance

Evolution of African-American dance, tracing its history and development from West and Central Africa to the United States. Investigates the social and cultural relevance of African American dance and its artistic merits through  contributions from its choreographers and performers.
AAS 052
African Traditional Religion

Introduction to traditional religions of the sub-Saharan African peoples: emphasis on myths, rituals and symbols in West, East, Central and South African indigenous religions. Examines themes: sacred kingship, divination system, women, prophecy, conversion and adaptation to Islam and Christianity.
AAS 080
Introduction to Black Politics

Introduction to the analysis of Afro-American politics, using conceptual frameworks from political science and other social sciences.
AAS 107C
African Descent Communities & Culture in Asia

Study of the origin and development of African Descent communities and cultures in Asia.   
AAS 107D
African Descent Communities & Cultures in Europe

Study of the origin and development of African Descent communities and cultures in Europe.   
AAS 110
West African Social Organization

Ecology, population, social and political organization, and culture of West Africa in the precolonial, colonial, and post-colonial periods.
AAS 130
Education in the African-American Community

Examination of the history of the education of African Americans in the United States. Examination and critique of contemporary theories concerning the schooling of African Americans. (Former AAS 140.)
AAS 151
Afro-American Vernacular Music & Verbal Arts

Socio-political dimensions of Afro-American musical forms like spiritual, work song, minstrelsy blues, rhythm and blues, jazz, gospel, soul and contemporary pop, and related verbal arts like preaching, toasting, rapping.
AAS 155A
African-American Dance & Culture in the United States, Brazil & the Caribbean

Comparative study of the African American dance forms in the U.S.A., Brazil, Haiti, Cuba, Jamaica, Barbados, and Trinidad. Examination of ritual, folk, and popular dance forms and the socio/historical factors that have influenced these forms.
AAS 172
Diaspora & New Black Identities 

Critical analysis about what it means to be Black/African American in the United States today. Topics include old and new diasporas, immigration, national origin, language, religion, class, education, politics, identity and cultural heritage. 
AAS 177
Politics of Life in Africa

Existing (in)capacities in the structures of state and society in Africa for people to live well. Topics include institutions and practices that define state and civil society encounters in Africa; democracy, ethnicity, economic crisis, religion, citizenship, etc. May be taught abroad.
AAS 180
Race & Ethnicity in Latin America

Social and political effects of racial and ethnic categorization in Latin America, including issues of economic production, citizenship, national belonging, and access to resources. Emphasis is on peoples of African, Indigenous, and Asian descent.
AAS 203
Critical Foundations in African Diaspora Studies

Integrative conceptual framework includes History, Geography, Political Economy, Culture, Aesthetics as tools to investigate the African Diaspora. Engage African Diaspora theories within student's research projects understanding issues developing from the movement of Africans to the rest of the world.
AAS 204
Methodologies in African American & African Studies

Relationship between theory and methodology, with emphasis on identifying relevant methodological approaches and constructing theoretically informed research projects for studying the experience of people of African descent whether on the African continent or in the rest of the world.
AAS 298B
Directed Group Study in African Studies


AAS 299
Directed Research


ABG 203
Advanced Animal Welfare

Advanced animal welfare. Key concepts used when evaluating and understanding the welfare of animals kept by humans. Topics include animal pain, stress, cognition, motivation and emotions. Critical discussion of primary literature.
ABG 401
Ethics & Professionalism in Animal Biology

Case studies and discussion of ethical and professional issues for animal biologists, including the use of animals in research and teaching, patenting and intellectual property, consulting and conflict of interest, scientific integrity, dealing with the media, and mentoring relationships.
ABI 050A
Animal Biology Laboratory

Scientific methods for answering questions in animal biology by doing exercises to demonstrate hypothesis testing and reporting, short laboratory, population and field experiments. Maintain notebooks, analyze data, interpret results and write reports.
ABI 098
Directed Group Study


ABI 099
Special Study for Unergraduate


ABI 187
Animal Biology Seminar

Seminar leading to development of the Major Proposal for the Animal Biology major.
ABI 198
Directed Group Study


ABI 199
Special Study for Advanced Unergratuate


ABT 015
Wood Properties & Fabrication

Study of wood properties and techniques for fabrication with wood. Gain experience working with various woods and woodworking tools for specific applications.
ABT 016
Metal Properties & Fabrication

Study of metal properties and of techniques for fabricating in metal. Physical principles, design considerations, effects of techniques on quality and appearance, and evaluation procedures. Experience in working with metal.
ABT 017
Plastic Properties & Fabrication

Study of the properties of plastic materials and the fundamentals of fabrication techniques. Experience in working with common plastics, with applications to biological systems.
ABT 049
Field Equipment Operation

Operation, adjustment, and troubleshooting of farm tractors and field equipment. Principles of operation, equipment terminology and uses of tilling, cultivating, thinning, and planting equipment. Typical sequences in cropping practices.
ABT 142
Equipment & Technology for Small Farms

Types and characteristics of agricultural equipment and technologies appropriate for small commercial farming. Adjustment and calibration of equipment. Selection of and budgeting for equipment. 
ABT 150
Introduction to Geographic Information Systems

Basic concepts, principles, and methods of GIS are presented. Data structures, database design, GIS data creation, GPS, and spatial analysis. May be taught abroad.
ACC 201
Financial Reporting 

Coverage includes the fundamentals of accounting and reporting economic events and transactions. Emphasizes the preparation of balance sheets, income statements, statements of cash flow, and statements of stockholders’ equity. 
ACC 211
Tax Reporting & Analysis 

Introduction to the taxation of business entities and their related transactions, with an emphasis on the details of tax law and tax reporting requirements. Topics include individual, partnership, and corporate taxation, as well as tax theory.
ACC 490
Topics in Accounting

Contemporary and emerging issues in financial management accounting. Application of modern techniques of evaluation and analysis of financial information. Use of appropriate electronic database and research techniques.
AED 160
Vocational Education

Philosophy and organization of vocational education, with particular reference to educational principles for agriculture commerce, home economics, and industry.
AED 190
Seminar in Agricultural Education

Discussion of selected critical issues in agricultural education.
AED 198
Directed Group Study

Directed group study. 
AED 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates

Special study.
AGC 290
Seminar

Selected topics in agricultural and environmental chemistry, presented by students.
AGC 299
Research

Arrangements should be made well in advance with a faculty member of the Group in Agricultural & Environmental Chemistry.
AHI 001A
Ancient Mediterranean Art

Introduction to the art and architecture of the ancient Mediterranean world, including Mesopotamia, Egypt, Greece, and Rome.
AHI 001B
Medieval & Renaissance Art

Christian, Barbarian, Moslem, and Classical traditions in European Art from the 4th through the 16th centuries.
AHI 001C
Baroque to Modern Art

Introduction to visual analysis through study of western art 1600-present, examining major artists and movements from Europe to North America. Study of the relationship of art and artists to political, religious, social change, and to changes in ideology, patronage, audience.
AHI 001D
Arts of Asia

Introduction to major forms and trends in the arts, architecture, and material culture of Asia from the Neolithic to the contemporary emphasizing the visual manifestation of secular and religious ideas and ideals.
AHI 001DY
Arts of Asia

Introduction to major forms and trends in the arts and material culture of Asia from the Neolithic to the contemporary, emphasizing the visual manifestation of secular and religious ideas and ideals.
AHI 001E
Islamic Art & Architecture

Introduction to the art and architecture of the Islamic world including the Middle East, Africa, Europe, and South Asia, from the 7th century CE to the 20th century.
AHI 005
Understanding Visual Culture

Development of visual literacy for an increasingly visual world; critical analyses focusing on the widest variety of visual imagery: the fine arts across media and eras of world culture, television, film, and advertising. Intended for a diverse spectrum of audiences.
AHI 025
Understanding Architecture

Development of architecture and urban design; how form, space, order are conceived and used across eras and cultures.  Examines the function and organization of space, technological problems of construction, visual qualities of architecture, and social issues connected to architecture.
AHI 110
Cultural History of Museums 

Evolution of museums in the western world from the "cabinet of curiosities" of 16th-century Europe to the modern "art center." The changing motives behind collecting, exhibiting, and interpretation of objects. Attention to museums' historical legacies and continuing philosophical dilemmas.
AHI 120A
Art, Architecture, & Human Rights

Study of human rights as they relate to art, architecture, and cultural heritage. Examines museums, art collections, and cultural-heritage management, their relation to the cultural prerogatives of communities and indigenous groups, and protection of cultural heritage during war and conflict.
AHI 121
Politics of Public Art

Politics of public art. Role of contemporary artists, public monuments, urban spaces, the movie industry, photography, propaganda art, and comics in construction of political ideologies and collective identities.
AHI 122
Sex & Space

Relationship between space and sexuality. Sexual metaphors in art and architecture, gender identity formation via images and space. Diverse intersections of sexuality and art history.
AHI 123
The Museum in the Age of Spectacle

The institution of the museum in the context of modernity, nationalism, (post)colonialism, and the society of spectacle. Designed to bring art objects of the Manetti Shrem collection, global art history, and foundational critical theory together in a meaningful and experimental way. 
AHI 130
Landscape, Nature, & Art

Interpretation of the natural world in the western world 1600-1900, with perspectives on the present; landscape painting, ideology of picturesque and sublime, landscape art and travel, reshaping the land as art; dialogues between art and science; nature as national identity.
AHI 150
Arts of Subsaharan Africa

Traditional arts and crafts of subsaharan Africa from prehistoric times to the present; the relationships among art, nature, cycles of life, and religion; art as expression of power; sculpture and culture in West and Central Africa; Colonialism and collecting.
AHI 151
Arts of the Indians of the Americas

Development of art in North America, emphasizing ancient Mexico. South American relationships and parallels. Recent and contemporary Indian arts and crafts from Alaska to Chile.
AHI 151
Arts of the Ancient New World

Artistic developments of the ancient New World. Interpretations of art and architecture in relation to religious ideologies, social structures, and political paradigms in Peru, Central America, the Caribbean, and Mesoamerica.
AHI 152
Arts of Oceania & Prehistoric Europe

Traditional arts of aboriginal Australia, Melanesia, Polynesia, and Micronesia, as seen in their cultural contexts. Prehistoric art of Europe and the Near East.
AHI 153
Art, Storytelling and Cultural Identity in the Pacific

Representation of the cultural identities of indigenous and migrant groups of the Pacific in visual arts and storytelling.
AHI 154
The Hindu Temple

Comparative history of architecture and symbolism of the Hindu Temple in India, Southeast Asia and the United States. Attention to the temple as expression of religious knowledge, political authority, and cultural heritage through the lens of colonialism and postcolonialism.
AHI 157
Buddhist Art

A historical survey of Buddhist art in relation to the development of Buddhist doctrine and philosophy.
AHI 158
Popular Religious Art in India

Survey of Indian popular religious art in prints, trade labels, comics and photographs.
AHI 163A
Early Chinese Art

Thematic and chronological examination of 3000 years of Chinese art and culture from Neolithic through Tang Dynasty (10th c. CE).  Study of ceremonial and secular objects manifesting folk beliefs and belief systems of ancestor worship, Buddhism, Daoism, and Confucianism.
AHI 163B
Chinese Painting

Thematic and chronological examination of Chinese painting and culture from the Tang Dynasty (7th century CE) through the early 20th century. Issues considered include political art (made to support or protest regimes), art and the market, art and individual expression.
AHI 163C
Early Modern Chinese Painting

Topics in Chinese Art History, 13th-19th century. Study of issues pertaining to self and society; gender and gendering; religion and philosophy; political engagement and protest; economy and the market; the effects created by periods of transition on visual expression.
AHI 163D
Art from China 1900 to the Present

Forms of modern and avant-garde expression from China's industrialization to the 21st century.  Interactions of art and politics, individual and state, art for the free market versus art for the state, expressions of modernity; China on the world stage.
AHI 164
The Arts of Japan

Japan’s painting, architecture, decorative arts, and print heritage, ancient times to the 20th century in literary, political, intellectual, and spiritual contexts; impact of Japanese art on the West and the West’s transformative impact upon Japan’s opening in the 19th century.
AHI 168
Great Cities

Transformation in architecture and urban form in Paris, London, and Vienna in the context of varying social, political, and economic systems as well as very different cultural traditions, concentrating on the years 1830-1914.
AHI 172A
Early Greek Art & Architecture

Examination of the origin and development of the major monuments of Greek art and architecture from the 8th century to the mid-5th century B.C.
AHI 172B
Later Greek Art & Architecture

Study of the art and architecture of later Classical and Hellenistic Greece, from the mid-5th century to the 1st century B.C.
AHI 173
Roman Art & Architecture

Art and architecture of Rome and the Roman Empire, from the founding of Rome through the 4th century C.E.
AHI 175
Architecture & Urbanism in Mediterranean Antiquity

Architecture and urban development in the ancient Near East, Greece, and Rome. Special emphasis on the social structure of the ancient city as expressed in its architecture, and on the interaction between local traditions and the impact of Greco-Roman urbanism.
AHI 176A
Art of the Middle Ages: Early Christian & Byzantine Art

Term paper or gallery studies and review. Painting, sculpture and architecture of the early Christian era and Byzantine Empire: through the later Roman Empire in the West and to the final capture of Constantinople in the East.
AHI 176B
Art of the Middle Ages: Early Medieval & Romanesque Art

Term paper or gallery studies and review. Painting, sculpture and architecture of western Europe in the early medieval era: from the rise of the barbarian kingdoms through the 12th century.
AHI 176C
Art of the Middle Ages: Gothic

Term paper or gallery studies and review. Painting, sculpture and architecture in northern Europe from the 12th through the 15th centuries.
AHI 177
Northern Renaissance Art

Artistic culture of Western and Central Europe c. 1350-1600. Topics include the development of "realism" in portraiture and landscape, prints and print culture, urbanism, science and the exotic, anti-religious artworks, religious attacks on art, contacts with Renaissance Italy. 
AHI 178B
Early Italian Renaissance Art & Architecture

Artists of the 15th century, with a focus on Florence; Donatello and Masaccio through Botticelli, in their artistic, architectural, and cultural setting; the impact of Humanism and the rebirth of classical learning.
AHI 178C
High & Late Italian Renaissance Art & Architecture

High Renaissance and Mannerism in 16th-century Italy: Leonardo, Michelangelo, Raphael, and Titian in their artistic and cultural settings—Florence, Rome, and Venice; the architecture of Bramante, Michelangelo, and Palladio.
AHI 179B
Baroque Art

Painting, sculpture and graphic arts in the 17th century, including such artists as Caravaggio, Rubens, Rembrandt, and Velázquez in their political and social context.
AHI 181
Latin American Art and Architecture 

Art and architecture of Latin America since Spanish arrival in the New World to the present. Visual, spatial, and material practices (painting, sculpture, urban form, cartography, and film, among others) from North and South America. How art and architecture shape and define colonial encounters and negotiations, religious and cultural exchange, conceptions of race and gender, and notions of nationalism and globalism.
AHI 181
Latin American Art & Architecture 

Art and architecture of Latin America since Spanish arrival in the New World to the present. Visual, spatial, and material practices (painting, sculpture, urban form, cartography, and film, among others) from North and South America. How art and architecture shape and define colonial encounters and negotiations, religious and cultural exchange, conceptions of race and gender, and notions of nationalism and globalism.
AHI 182
British Art & Culture (1750-1900)

British painting in relation to the position of women in society and the rise of the middle-class art market. Topics covered Hogarth and popular culture, Queen Victoria and the female gaze, and Pre-Raphaelite artists and collectors.
AHI 183C
Modernism in France, 1880-1940

Development of modern art in France, its social context, and its transnational aspects. Post-Impressionism, Fauvism, Cubism, Expressionism, and Surrealism are considered in relation to secessionist movements, the formation of other artistic groups, new forms of patronage, and new audiences.
AHI 185
Avant-Gardism & its Aftermath, 1917-1960

Social, cultural, aesthetic, and theoretical development for artists and their audiences in the context of larger issues like the Mexican, Russian and German revolutions, WWI, the Depression, WWII, etc., and a critical-theoretical inquiry into questions of modernism, modernity, and avant-gardism.
AHI 186
Contemporary Art 1960-Present

Development of new media and aesthetics in the context of such cultural and political phenomena as the New Left, feminism, and globalization; investigation of the critical-theoretical questions of neo avant-gardism, postmodernism, and postmodernity.
AHI 187
Contemporary Architecture

Introduction to world architecture and urban design since circa 1966. Relation of influential styles, buildings, and architects to postmodern debates and to cultural, economic, technological and environmental change. 
AHI 188A
The American Home

American domestic architecture and its responsiveness to changes in daily life from Colonial times to the 1960s. Vernacular developments, effects of different socioeconomic conditions, and women's role in shaping the home receive special attention.
AHI 188B
Architecture of the United States

Major movements from colonial times to the present. The role of buildings in a changing American society, the interplay of styles with technologies of construction, relationship between American and European developments and evolution of the architectural and planning professions.
AHI 188C
American Art to 1910

Major movements in American art from the 17th-century English-speaking colonies to the onset of World War I.
AHI 189
Photography in History

Social, cultural, aesthetic and technical developments in the history of photography including patronage and reception, commercial, scientific, political and artistic applications, and a critical-theoretical inquiry into photography's impact on the social category "art" and the history of subjectivity.
AHI 198
Directed Group Study

Directed group Study. May be taught abroad.
AHI 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates


AHI 200A
Visual Theory & Interpretive Methods 

Close study of selected recent developments in interpretive methodology used by art historians and other analysts of visual culture and the place of those developments within art history's history and in the larger field of social, cultural and historical analysis. 
AHI 200B
Research & Writing Methods in Art History

Development of the research, writing, and editing skills necessary for producing publishable work. Focus on reference tools used by art historians and the mechanics of scholarship, from question framing and organization of ideas to writing clear, effective prose.
AHI 250
Problems in Art Historical Research

Major topics in art historical research, emphasizing special methods ofinvestigation, and of historical and critical analysis.
AHI 254
Seminar in Classical Art

Selected areas of special study in classical art of the Greek and Roman tradition.
AHI 263
Seminar in Chinese Art

Selected areas of special study in Chinese Art.
AHI 276
Seminar in Medieval Art

Selected areas of special study in medieval art from Early Christian to late Gothic.
AHI 278
Seminar in Italian Renaissance Art

Selected areas of special study in Italian art from the 14th to the 16th century.
AHI 283
Seminar in Visual Culture & Gender

Selected areas of special study in the relationship between visual culture and gender in Europe and America from 1750 to present. 
AHI 288
Seminar in European & American Architecture

Exploration of selected topics in European and American architectural history with concentration on the Modern Period.
AHI 290
Special topics in Art History

Special research seminar in the theory or methods of Art History, or in a period of Art History. Topic varies depending on the interests of the instructor or students.
AHI 298
Directed Group Study


AHI 299
Individual Study


AHI 390
Introduction to Teaching Art History for Teaching Assistants

Designed for teaching assistants with emphasis on problems and procedures encountered by teachers of undergraduate art history.
AHI 401
Museum Training: Curatorial Principles

Approved for graduate degree credit. Study of private and public collections. Museum personalities. Appraisal of works of art; appraisal ethics. Auction and sales: methods and catalogues. Registration. Museum technical problems. Connoisseurship. Collateral reading. Visits to museums. Seminar with assigned papers.
AHI 402
Museum Training: Exhibition Methods

Approved for graduate degree credit. History of exhibition methods in
AMS 001A
Science & American Culture

American science as a cultural system. Mutual influence and interaction of that system with other cultural systems including religion, social thought, art, architecture, literature, music, and common sense.
AMS 001B
Religion in American Lives

Religions and spiritual practices in the Unisted States, and their interrelationships with other aspects of U.S. history, society and culture; indigenous and imported faiths, and the impact of immigration, colonization and culture contact on religious systems.
AMS 001C
American Lives Through Autobiography

American culture as understood through the individual life stories told by Americans, with attention to the roles of gender, race, ethnicity, social class, and sexual orientation in the individual's life course.
AMS 001E
Nature & Culture in America

Uses and abuses of nature in America; patterns of inhabitation, exploitation, appreciation, and neglect; attention to California; emphasis on metaphor as a key to understanding ourselves and the natural world; attention to models of healing: stewardship, ecology, the "rights" movement.
AMS 005
Technology in American Lives

Technology as both a material cultural force and a symbol in Americanculture; the lives of engineers at work and play; images of the engineer and technology in popular culture; social political and ethical issues raised by technology.
AMS 010
Introduction to American Studies

Ideals, conflicts, and realities defining American Cultures through study of popular music, advertising, and other media. Themes include Imagining America, Citizenship and Belonging, and Cultural/Spatial Practices.
AMS 012
U.S. Disability Culture & Medicine

Disability as a form of social exclusion; disability as social and cultural identity; intersections of disability with race, gender, class, and sexuality; popular culture, art, television, film, and literature by disabled people; critiques of medicine by people with disabilities; health disparities; ways to make medicine more inclusive.
AMS 021
Objects & Everyday Life

Material culture (objects and artifacts ranging from everyday objects like toys and furnishings to buildings and constructed landscapes) as evidence for understanding the everyday (vernacular) lives (gender, social class, ethnicity, region, age, and other factors; collecting and displaying material.
AMS 025
United States as a Business Culture

Business as a cultural system and its relation to religion, politics, arts, science, technology, and material culture; business themes of success, creativity, invention, and competition in American autobiographies, fiction, advice literature, film, and television; cultures of the workplace; multinational business.
AMS 030
Images of America & Americans in Popular Culture

Investigation of verbal and visual discourses about American identity in various popular culture products, including film, television, radio, music, fiction, art, advertising, and commercial experiences; discourses about the United States in the popular culture of other societies.
AMS 055
Food in American Culture

Relationship between food and culture; relationship between food and the social order; influences on eating habits and the tensions between them including identity, convenience, and responsibility; multiple disciplines and genres. 
AMS 059
Music & American Culture

Examination of music and American culture. Studies will explore music in its cultural contexts, which may include examinations of recording and broadcasting, of race, class, and gender, the role of technolgy, and relationships between musical production, consumption and listening.
AMS 095
Careers & Identity in American Culture

Defining one's identity through the career. Life course, preparation, and choices. Personality and career. Ethics. Gender, ethnicity, sexuality, and social class in the workplace. Transnational workplace. Conflicts between the career and other social roles.
AMS 099
Individual Study for Undergraduates


AMS 100
Methods in American Studies

Design and implementation of interdisciplinary research, analysis and writing for American Studies and other cultural studies fields. Library and Internet research skills, project/problem definition, methods for study of texts, individuals, communities. Hand-on, skill-building, focused reading, discussion.
AMS 101A
Special Topics: Popular Culture Studies

Intensive reading, writing, and special projects. Interdisciplinary group study of special topics in American Culture Studies, designed for non-majors as well as majors. 
AMS 101B
Special Topics: Women's Studies

Intensive reading, writing, and special projects. Interdisciplinary group study of special topics in American Culture Studies, designed for non-majors as well as majors. 
AMS 101C
Special Topics: Material Aspects of American Culture

Intensive reading, writing, and special projects. Interdisciplinary group study of special topics in American Culture Studies, designed for non-majors as well as majors. 
AMS 101E
Special Topics: American Lives Through Autobiography

Intensive reading, writing, and special projects. Interdisciplinary group study of special topics in American Culture Studies, designed for non-majors as well as majors. 
AMS 101F
Special Topics: Interrelationship Between Arts & Ideas

Intensive reading, writing, and special projects. Interdisciplinary group study of special topics in American Culture Studies, designed for non-majors as well as majors. 
AMS 101G
Special Topics: New Directions in American Culture Studies

Intensive reading, writing, and special projects. Interdisciplinary group study of special topics in American Culture Studies, designed for non-majors as well as majors. 
AMS 101H
Special Topics: Problems in Cross-Cultural American Studies

Intensive reading, writing, and special projects. Interdisciplinary group study of special topics in American Culture Studies, designed for non-majors as well as majors. 
AMS 110
A Decade in American Civilization

Close examination of a single decade in American civilization; the connections between the history, literature, arts, customs, and ideas of Americans living in the decade. Issues and representations of race, class, gender, age, and sexuality in the decade. 
AMS 130
American Popular Culture

American popular expression and experience as a cultural system, and the relationship between this system and elite and folk cultures. Exploration of theories and methods for discovering and interpreting patterns of meaning in American popular culture.
AMS 139
Feminist Cultural Studies

Histories, theories, and practices of feminist traditions within cultural studies.
AMS 150
Interdisciplinary Approaches to Environmental Justice/Injustice

Environmental justice through interdisciplinary lenses. Frameworks that analyze environmental issues through the lens of social justice and human inequality, specifically categories of race, class, gender, nature and nation. Particular focus on California and the Central Valley. 
AMS 151
American Landscapes & Places

Comparative study of several American cultural populations inhabiting a region, including their relationship to a shared biological, physical, and social environment, their intercultural relations, and their relationships to the dominant American popular and elite culture and folk traditions.
AMS 152
The Lives of Children in America

Experience of childhood and adolescence in American culture, as understood through historical, literary, artistic, and social scientific approaches.
AMS 153
The Individual & Community in America

Interdisciplinary examination of past and present tensions between the individual and the community in American experience, as those tensions are expressed in such cultural systems as folklore, public ritual, popular entertainment, literature, fine arts, architecture, and social thought.
AMS 154
The Lives of Men in America

Interdisciplinary examination of the lives of boys and men in America, toward understanding cultural definitions of masculinity, the ways individuals have accepted or resisted these definitions, and the broader consequences of the struggle over the social construction of gender.
AMS 155
Eating in America

Interdisciplinary examination of the culture of food in America. Exploration of eating as a richly symbolic event integral to how Americans express and negotiate values, politics and identity.
AMS 156
Race, Culture & Society in the United States

Interdisciplinary examination of the significance of race in the making of America; how race shapes culture, identities and social processes in the United States; the interweaving of race with gender, class and nationhood in self and community.
AMS 157
Animals in American Culture

Animals as symbols in American thought, as found in folklore, popular culture, literature, and art; customs and stories around human-animal interactions, including hunting, religion, foodways, pets, zoos, circuses, rodeos, theme parks, and scientific research on animals. 
AMS 158
Technology & the Modern American Body

History and analysis of relationships between human bodies and technologies in modern society. Dominant and eccentric examples of how human bodies and technologies influence one another and reveal underlying cultural assumptions.
AMS 160
Undergraduate Seminar in American Studies

Intensive reading, discussion, research, and writing by small groups in selected topics of American Studies scholarship; emphasis on theory and its application to American material. 
AMS 190A
Senior Thesis Research Seminar

Research and prospectus writing for senior thesis.
AMS 298
Group Study


AMS 299
Individual Study


ANB 299
Research

Advanced research in one of the specialty areas in animal behavior
ANB 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum


ANE 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates


ANE 435
Primary Care Multidisciplinary Pain Management

Rotation will give 3rd year primary-care bound students an overview of the scope of Pain Medicine.
ANG 211
Genetic Engineering of Animals

Review of techniques for the genetic engineering of animals and their limitations and applications. Student-led discussions of recent papers in the field and possible future applications of genetically engineered animals in basic research and applied agricultural and medical research.
ANG 299
Research in Animal Genetics


ANS 001
Domestic Animals & People

Animal domestication and factors affecting their characteristics and distribution. Animal use for food, fiber, work, drugs, research and recreation; present and future roles in society. Laboratory exercises with beef and dairy cattle, poultry, sheep, swine, laboratory animals, fish, horses, meat and dairy products.
ANS 012
Animal Science: Basic Principles & Application

Overview of domestic and global animal industries. Exploration of production systems, animal biology, genetics, anatomy, physiology, reproduction, health, behavior, research, biotechnology and welfare.
ANS 015
Introductory Horse Husbandry

Introduction to care and use of light horses emphasizing the basic principles for selection of horses, responsibilities of ownership, recreational use and raising of foals.
ANS 017
Canine Behavior: Learning & Cognition

Domestic dog behavior from basic principles of learning to complex cognitive behaviors; interaction between learning and cognition including how these processes contribute to interactions with humans; basic genetic correlates of learning and cognition.
ANS 018
Introductory Aquaculture

Historical and contemporary aquacultural practices. Interaction between the aqueous culture environment and the biology of aquatic animals. Impact of economics and governmental policies on the development ofaquaculture. Interaction of aquacultural practices with larger societal goals.
ANS 041
Domestic Animal Production

Principles of farm animal management, including dairy and beef cattle, sheep, and swine. Industry trends, care and management, nutrition, and reproduction.
ANS 042
Introductory Companion Animal Biology

Companion animal domestication. Historical, contemporary perspectives.methods in studying the human-animal bond. Discussions: application of biological concepts to problems related to companion animals.
ANS 049A
Animal Management Practices: Aquaculture

Application of the principles of elementary biology to the management of a specific animal species. Up to four different topics may be taken.
ANS 049B
Animal Management Practices: Beef

Application of the principles of elementary biology to the management of a specific animal species. Up to four different topics may be taken.
ANS 049C
Animal Management Practices: Dairy

Application of the principles of elementary biology to the management of a specific animal species. Up to four different topics may be taken.
ANS 049D
Animal Management Practices: Goats

Application of the principles of elementary biology to the management of a specific animal species. Up to four different topics may be taken.
ANS 049E
Animal Management Practices: Horses

Application of the principles of elementary biology to the management of a specific animal species. Up to four different topics may be taken.
ANS 049F
Animal Management Practices: Laboratory Animals

Application of the principles of elementary biology to the management of a specific animal species. Up to four different topics may be taken.
ANS 049G
Animal Management Practices: Meats

Application of the principles of elementary biology to the management of a specific animal species. Up to four different topics may be taken.
ANS 049H
Animal Management Practices: Poultry

Application of the principles of elementary biology to the management of a specific animal species. Up to four different topics may be taken.
ANS 049I
Animal Management Practices: Sheep

Application of the principles of elementary biology to the management of a specific animal species. Up to four different topics may be taken.
ANS 049J
Animal Management Practices: Swine

Application of the principles of elementary biology to the management of a specific animal species. Up to four different topics may be taken.
ANS 049K
Animal Management Practices: Captive & Companion Avian

Application of the principles of elementary biology to the management of a specific animal species. Up to four different topics may be taken.
ANS 108
Equine Behavior & Welfare

Improve the understanding and application of good welfare practices when managing, training, transporting, treating, or breeding equine. Recognize changes in behavior or causes related to comprised health or welfare.
ANS 290
Seminar

Reports and discussions of topics of interest in genetics, nutrition, and physiology as they apply to animal science.
ANS 297
Supervised Teaching in Animal Science

Practical experience in teaching Animal Science at University level; curriculum design and evaluation; preparation and presentation of material. Assistance in laboratories, discussion sections, and evaluation of student work. Evaluation letter sent to the graduate advisor with copy to the student.
ANS 299
Research


ANT 001
Human Evolutionary Biology

Processes and course of human evolution; primatology; biological and social diversity within Homo sapiens; human paleontology.
ANT 001Y
Human Evolutionary Biology (Hybrid Version)

Evolutionary theory and mechanisms of evolution; basic population and quantitative genetics; primatology; biological and cultural diversity within Homo sapiens; paleoanthropology.
ANT 002
Cultural Anthropology

Introduction to cultural diversity in its many forms and methods used by anthropologists to account for it. Relational dynamic of culture, history, and power in constituting "social facts" and "realities." Critical thinking of contemporary concerns. 
ANT 003
Introduction to Archaeology

Development of archaeology as an anthropological study; objectivesand methods of modern archaeology.
ANT 004
Introduction to Anthropological Linguistics

Exploration of the role of language in social interaction and world view, minority languages and dialects, bilingualism, literacy, the social motivation of language change. Introduction of analytical techniques of linguistics and demonstration of their relevance to language in sociocultural issues.
ANT 013
Scientific Method in Physical Anthropology

Skills for scientific thinking; designing, implementing, analyzing, interpreting, presenting, and criticizing research. Collection and analysis of original data. Basic statistical methods.
ANT 015
From Birth to Death: The Evolution of the Human Life Cycle

Introduction to the biology of birth, childhood, marriage, the family, old age, and death. Examines comparative characteristics of nonhuman primates and other animals as well as cross-cultural variation in humans by study of selected cases.
ANT 020
Comparative Cultures

Introduction to the anthropological study of cultural diversity. Casestudies of eight societies will be presented to illustrate and compare the distinctive features of major cultural regions of the world. Concludes with a discussion of modernization.
ANT 021
Zombies

Figure of the zombie as window into ideas about race, economic exploitation, and what it means to be human. Zombie lore in the Afro-Atlantic world and its re-imagining in contemporary pop culture. 
ANT 023
Introduction to World Prehistory

Broadly surveys patterns and changes in the human species' physical and cultural evolution from earliest evidence for "humanness" to recent development of large-scale complex societies or "civilizations." Lectures emphasize use of archaeology in reconstructing the past.
ANT 024
Ancient Crops & People

The archaeological evidence for domestication of plants and the origins of agricultural societies. Anthropological context of agriculture and the effects on sexual division of labor, social inequality, wealth accumulation, warfare, human health, and sedentism.
ANT 025
Ancient Animals & People

History of human and animal relationships and how animals have influenced social and economic structures of past societies. Why, when and how humans used animals in the context of hunting, domestication, secondary products, ritual, companionship, and conservation. 
ANT 026
Mummies of the Ancient World

Archaeological approaches for studying mummies and the process of mummification in the ancient world. Analytical techniques used, environmental factors promoting mummification, and archaeological conservation of mummified bodies.
ANT 027
Great Adaptations: Genetic & Cultural Evolution in the Spread of Humanity 

How humans adapted to diverse ecologies through cultural and genetic changes. Illustrations include evolution in response to disease, dietary, social, and communication challenges.
ANT 028
Prehistoric Origins of Art

Interdisciplinary look at the earliest evidence for art and symbolic behavior. Method and techniques to investigate Prehistoric art. Interpretative framework and relevance for understanding the role of symbolic activities in traditional societies.  
ANT 029
Vikings 

History of the Vikings through the Slavic and Mediterranean regions in the East and across the vast North Atlantic region to the west. Emphasis on archaeology and sagas to understand Viking culture from the 8th to 11th centuries.
ANT 030
Sexualities

Introduction to the study of sexuality, particularly to the meanings and social organization of same-sex sexual behavior across cultures and through time.  Biological and cultural approaches will be compared, and current North American issues placed in a wider comparative context.
ANT 032
Drugs, Science & Culture

Drugs, politics, science, society in a cultural perspective: emphasis on roles of science, government and the media in shifting attitudes toward alcohol, marijuana, Prozac and other pharmaceuticals; drug laws, war on drugs and global trade in sugar, opium, cocaine.
ANT 034
Cultures of Consumerism

Aspects of modern consumer cultures in capitalist and socialist countries. Transformations of material cultures over the past century. Case studies on the intersections of gender, class, and culture in everyday consumption practices.
ANT 054
Introduction to Primatology

Basic survey of the primates as a separate order of mammals; natural history and evolution of primates; consideration of hypotheses for their origin.
ANT 056
Introduction to Forensic Anthropology

Survey of anthropological techniques as applied within the legal system, including scene documentation and recovery, human identification, and trauma analysis. Examination of error and uncertainty, ethics, and human rights in forensic anthropology.
ANT 098
Directed Group Study

Primarily intended for lower division students.
ANT 122A
Economic Anthropology

The varieties of production, exchange, and consumption behavior in precapitalist economies, their interaction with culture and social-political organization, and the theories that account for these phenomena.  The effects of capitalism on precapitalist sectors.
ANT 186A
Museum Studies: Analysis of Native American Basketry

Study of ethnographic and prehistoric basketry from North America, especially California and Oregon, in a multidisciplinary anthropological context. Techniques for basketry attribution and textile analysis.
ANT 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates


ANT 200
History of Anthropology

Historical development of socio-cultural theory within anthropology, from mid-19th to mid-20th centuries. Focus on original theory texts in context of historical developments in the field as a whole.
ANT 202
History & Theory of Biological Anthropology

History of thought in biological anthropology and analysis of major theoretical problems in the field. Suggested for all first-year graduate students lacking intensive preparation in biological anthropology.
ANT 203
History & Theory of Archaeology

History of archaeology and archaeological theory and analysis of archaeological research methodology.
ANT 205
History & Theory in Anthropological Linguistics

History of thought in anthropological linguistics. Consideration of the historical development of fundamental ideas in anthropological linguistics, of major theoretical issues, and of research methodology.
ANT 210
Aspects of Culture Structure

Analysis of various phases of culture, such as religion, economics, law, and folklore.
ANT 216
Problems in Archeological Method

Techniques for analyzing archeological data; application to various prehistoric cultures.
ANT 217
Quantitative Modeling in Archaeology

Examination of the nature of archaeological data with a focus on the quantitative and statistical techniques available to model, analyze, display, and make sense of such data. 
ANT 218
Topics in New World Prehistory

Advanced study on current problems in New World Prehistory and archaeology.
ANT 219
Topics in Old World Prehistory

Advanced study on current problems in Old World prehistory and archaeology. 
ANT 224
Problems in Comparative Religion

Advanced study of current problems in the anthropological study of religion.
ANT 225
State & Nation in the Modern World

A presentation of current anthropological theories of the origins and nature of the modern nation-state in both the First and Third Worlds, with special reference to state ideology (nationalism) and forms of control.
ANT 229
Gender, Identity, & Self

Intersections of gender, identity, and selfhood cross-culturally and historically. How the self is feminized and masculinized, and interfaces with sexual, race, class, work, national, minority, and majority identities under different historical, cultural, and social structural conditions. 
ANT 239
Problems in African Society & Culture

Diachronic analyses of traditional institutions in sub-Saharan Africa.
ANT 241
Topics in North American Ethnology

Advanced study on current problems in North American ethnography and culture history.
ANT 263
Human Applications of Foraging Theory

Foraging theory models and their use in ethnographic and archaeological analyses of human behavior, with a focus on hunter-gatherers and resource selection, patch use, population and habitat, central places, sharing, stochastic processes, population dynamics, and conservation behavior.
ANT 265
Language, Performance, & Power

Exploration of the intersection between linguistic and social theories in the language-state relation and the performance of identity. Ideological sources of language differentiation; nation-building and linguistic difference. Political economic, sociolinguistic, and ethnographic approaches to understanding linguistic inequality.
ANT 270
Anthropology Colloquium Seminar

Reports and discussions of recent advances in the four subfields of anthropology. Presented by guest speakers.
ANT 292
Seminar in Linguistic Anthropology

Selected topics in linguistic anthropology.
ANT 298
Group Study


ANT 299
Research


ANT 299D
Dissertation Research


APC 290
Seminar

Discussion and critical evaluation of advanced topics and current trends in research.
ARB 001
Elementary Arabic 1

Introduction to basic Arabic. Interactive and integrated presentation of listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills, including the alphabet and basic syntax. Focus on standard Arabic with basic skills in spoken Egyptian and/or one other colloquial dialect. 
ARB 001A
Accelerated Intensive Elementary Arabic

Special 12-week accelerated, intensive summer session course that combines the work of courses ARB 001, 002, and 003. Introduction to Modern Standard Arabic through development of all language skills in a cultural context with emphasis on communicative proficiency.
ARB 021A
Accelerated Intensive Intermediate Arabic

Special 12-week accelerated, intensive summer session course that combines the work of courses ARB 021, ARB 022, and ARB 023. Modern Standard Arabic through development of all language skills in a cultural context with emphasis on communicative proficiency. 
ARB 140
A Story for a Life: The Arabian Nights

In-depth exploration of The Arabian Nights, the best-known work of pre-modern Arabic literature and a major work of world literature. Analysis of the work in its historical context and in comparison to other frame tales in world literature.
ARE 001
Economic Basis of the Agricultural Industry

Agriculture and man; the agricultural industry in U.S. and world economies; production and supply, marketing and demand; agriculturalland, capital and labor markets; economic and social problems of agriculture in an urban and industrialized economy emphasizing California.
ARE 001S
Economic Basis of the Agricultural Industry

Agriculture and man; the agricultural industry in Australia and world economies; production and supply, marketing and demand; agricultural land, capital and labor markets; economic and social problems of agriculture in an urban and industrialized economy emphasizing Australia. May be taught abroad in Australia under the supervision of a UC Davis faculty member.
ARE 015
Population, Environment & World Agriculture

Economic analysis of interactions among population, environment, natural resources and development of world agriculture. Introduces students to economic thinking about population growth, its causes and consequences for world food demand, and environmental and technological limits to increasing food supplies.
ARE 143
Investments

Survey of investment institutions, sources of investment information, and portfolio theory. Analysis of the stock, bond and real estate markets from the perspective of the investor.
ARE 145
Farm & Rural Resources Appraisal

Principles and procedures of the valuation process with emphasis placed on rural real estate. Includes identification of the major physical and economic determinants of value, the three primary appraisal approaches to valuation, discussion of appraisal activity and practice.
ARE 192
Internship

Internship experience off and on campus in all subject areas offered in the Department of Agricultural & Resource Economics. Internships are supervised by a member of the staff.
ARE 252
Optimization with Economic Applications

Microeconomic topics in the framework of mathematical programming.
ARE 290
Topics in Agricultural & Resource Economics

Selected topics in agricultural and resource economics, focusing on current research.
ARE 293
Analysis of California Agriculture & Resources

Review and analysis of production, marketing, and resource issues facing agricultural firms in California. Application of economic theory and measurement to individual firm and industry decisions in an applied setting. Fieldwork-45 hours total, including one five-day summer field trip. 
ARE 298
Directed Group Study

Advanced study through special seminars, informal group studies, or group research on problems for analysis and experimentation. Sections:(1) Managerial Economics; (2) Agricultural Policy; (3) Community & Regional Development; (4) Natural Resources; (5) Human Resources; (6) Research Methods & Quantitative Analysis.
ARE 299
Individual Study

Sections: (1) Managerial Economics; (2) Agricultural Policy; (3) Community & Regional Development; (4) Natural Resources; (5) Human Resources; (6) Research Methods & Quantitative Analysis; and (7) Dissertation Research Prospectus.
ARE 299D
Special Study for Doctoral Dissertation


ART 002
Beginning Drawing

Introduction to drawing using various black and white media to articulate forms and organize space, with reference to historical and contemporary works. 
ART 005
Beginning Sculpture

Basic sculpture techniques using a variety of media. Form in space using cardboard, plaster, and/or cement, wood and/or metal and other media.
ART 007
Beginning Painting

Introduction to techniques and concepts in the practice of painting.
ART 007
Beginning Painting

Introduction to techniques and concepts in the practice of painting.
ART 008
Beginning Ceramic Sculpture

Introduction to ceramic sculpture construction and processes. Large scale hand-building, glazing, kilns and kiln firing technology.
ART 009
Beginning Photography

Introduction to the fundamental technical, aesthetic, and formal aspects of photography. Camera skills, film developing and printing in the black and white darkroom.
ART 009
Beginning Photography

Introduction to visual language of photographic art and technique. Manual camera operation and printing techniques. Concept and practice of photography as an art form and creating photographic projects.
ART 010
Fine Art Appreciation

Survey of contemporary artists since 1970. Topics explore contemporary thought within the visual arts using the forms and strategies of painting, sculpture, installation, performance, photography, and video in collaborative, ephemeral and multimedia approaches. Intended for Art and non-Art majors.
ART 010D
Contemporary Art Appreciation

Survey of contemporary art since 1960; includes discussion. Explores contemporary thought within the visual arts using forms and strategies of painting, sculpture, installation, performance, photo and video in collaborative, ephermeral and multimedia approaches. For Art and non-Art majors.
ART 010F
Contemporary Art Appreciation

Survey of contemporary art since 1960; includes fieldwork. Explores contemporary thought within the visual arts using forms and strategies of painting, sculpture, installation, performance, photo and video in collaborative, ephermeral and multimedia approaches. For Art and non-Art majors.
ART 011
Beginning Printmaking

Introduction to printmaking techniques such as monography, relief, and intaglio. Investigation of personal imagery through use of these techniques.
ART 012
Beginning Video

Production techniques of video shooting, editing, lighting, sound and effects.  A conceptual framework for video-art techniques.  
ART 024
Introduction to Experimental Video & Film

Evolution of moving image technologies. Shifts within avant-garde artistic practices. Conceptual and historical differences between film and video. Relationship of film and video to fine arts.  
ART 030
Introduction to Contemporary Visual Culture

Establishing visual literacy across the media of fine art, photography, advertising, television and film; media culture; focus on critical decoding of contemporary visual culture.
ART 149
Introduction to Critical Theory

Overview of 20th-century critical theories of culture and their relation to visual art and mass media culture.
ART 192
Internship

Supervised program of internships in artists' studios and at professional art institutions such as museums, galleries, and art archives including collections of slides and photographs.
ART 220
Research Methods for Artists

Research methods for artists through critical reading and writing, studio practice, presentations, site-visits, and professional engagement related to the field of visual art.
ART 221A
Critical Exploration & Collaboration

May be repeated up to 1 <span class="repeat-option">Time(s)
ART 221B
Advanced Critical Exploration & Collaboration

May be repeated up to 1 <span class="repeat-option">Time(s)
ART 223
Concepts & Critique

May be repeated up to 1 <span class="repeat-option">Time(s)
ART 224
Theory & Concepts on Critical Issues in Contemporary Art

Critical and conceptual foundations for graduate students. Political, social and cultural questions as they relate to the production and reception of art. Contemporary theories to develop verbal and analytical skills.
ART 225
Professional Practice in Contemporary Art 

May be repeated up to 1 <span class="repeat-option">Time(s)
ART 226
Exhibition Strategy & Thesis Seminar

May be repeated up to 1 <span class="repeat-option">Time(s)
ART 227
Collaboration & Interdisciplinarity

May be repeated up to 1 <span class="repeat-option">Time(s)
ART 290
Seminar

Original works produced for group discussion and criticism; associated topics of a contemporary and historical nature.
ART 290A
Critical Discourse in Contemporary Art

Critical discourse in contemporary art and application to practice. Exploration of concerns in broader artistic and contemporary context. How artists look to shift prevalent expectations through critical analysis.
ART 290B
Critical Discourse in Studio Practice

May be repeated up to 1 <span class="repeat-option">Time(s)
ART 290C
Critical Discourse in Materiality

Mid-year study focusing on individual work in the studio. Explores mediums, techniques, skill building, resourcing and problem solving. Defining the artists relationship to topics in contemporary art through speaking, writing, research and presentation.
ART 290D
Critical Discourse in Context of Social Issues

Advanced course for second-year Graduate students. Discussion of social, political, cultural, and economic issues in a constantly changing world. How contemporary art practice are affected by global issues.
ART 290D
Critical Discourse in Context 

Advanced course for second-year Graduate students. Discussion of social, political, cultural, and economic issues in a constantly changing world. How contemporary art practice are affected by global issues.
ART 290E
Critical Discourse in Digital Media

May be repeated up to 1 <span class="repeat-option">Time(s)
ART 290E
Critical Discourse on Media

May be repeated up to 1 <span class="repeat-option">Time(s)
ART 290F
Critical Discourse in Performance

May be repeated up to 1 <span class="repeat-option">Time(s)
ART 290F
Critical Discourse in Presentation

For second-year graduate students. Study focuses on individual performance work. Exploration extends into other mediums, techniques for props or sites, tapping the resources of peers, problem solving with the intention to deepen understanding and engagement with an audience. Exploration and analysis of subjects in cont. art and begin to define their relationship to these ideas through speaking, writing, research and presentation in ways that are relevant to their performance art practice. 
ART 291
Seminar: Critical Evaluation


ART 292
Seminar: Comprehensive Qualifying

Further critical evaluation of the student's work to determine his eligibility to begin the Comprehensive Project.
ART 299
Individual Study


ART 299D
Comprehensive Project

An original body of work accompanied by a catalog summarizing the student's aesthetic position.
ART 401
Museum Training: Curatorial Principles

Approved for graduate degree credit. Study of private and public collections. Museum personalities. Appraisal of works of art; ethics of appraisal. Auction and sales: methods and catalogues. Registration. Technical problems of the museum. Connoisseurship. Collateral reading. Visits to museums.
ART 402
Museum Training: Exhibition Methods

Approved for graduate degree credit. History of exhibition methods in private and public collections. Comparisons of different types of museums and their exhibition problems. Lighting and techniques of display with emphasis on actual design. Experimentation with unusual presentation forms.
ASA 001
Historical Experience of Asian Americans

Introduction to Asian American Studies through an overview of the history of Asians in America from the 1840s to the present within the context of the development of the United States.
ASA 002
Contemporary Issues of  Asian Americans

Introduction to Asian American Studies through the critical analysis of the impact of race, racism, ethnicity, imperialism, militarism, and immigration since post-World War II on Asian Americans.  Topics may include sexuality, criminality, class, hate crimes, and inter-ethnic relations.
ASA 003
Social & Psychological Perspectives of Asian Americans

Major psychosocial issues of Asian Americans. Theories and empirical research that address cultural values, behavioral norms, ethnic stereotypes, racism, acculturation, ethnic identity development, family communication, stressors and social support systems, academic achievement, interpersonal effectiveness, and psychopathology.
ASA 004
Asian American Cultural Studies

Interdisciplinary course examines the multiple ways in which race, class, sexuality and gender, as well as the recent turn to transnationalism and postcolonial theory, have changed the ways we read Asian American literature and see art, theater and film.
ASA 098
Directed Group Study

Primarily intended for lower division students.
ASA 098F
Student Facilitated Course

Student-facilitated (taught) course intended for lower division students. 
ASA 099
Special Study for Undergraduates


ASA 100
Asian American Communities

Survey and analysis of Asian American communities within both historical and contemporary contexts. Presentation of the analytical skills, theories, and concepts needed to describe, explain, and understand the diversity of Asian American communities within the larger, dominant society.
ASA 112
Asian American Women

Experiences of Asian American women from major ethnic subgroups
ASA 113
Asian American Sexuality

Restrictive U.S. immigration laws, labor exploitation, race-based exclusionary laws, removal and internment, anti-miscegenation laws, and other examples of social control are surveyed to assess their role in shaping the sexuality of the different Asian American groups.
ASA 114
Asian Diasporas

Asian diasporic communities and the experiences of its members in the United States and internationally. Community building, cyberspace, gender issues, labor, transnational practices, effects of globalization, political organizing, homeland politics, humanitarian projects, citizenship and nationalism.
ASA 115
Multiracial Asian Pacific American Issues

Introduction to the experiences of biracial and multiracial Asian Pacific people in the U.S., concentrating on theories of race, racial identity formation, culture, media, and anti-racist struggles. Critical approaches to the analysis of popular media and academic representations.
ASA 116
Asian American Youth

Social experiences of diverse groups of Asian American youth. Ways in which youth themselves actively create cultural expressions and political interventions.
ASA 121
Asian American Performance

Performance work by, for, and/or about Asian Pacific Americans including dramatic literature, performance art, dance, and film. Ethnicity, gender and sexuality, class and age as they intersect with Asian Pacific American identities in and through dramatic performance.
ASA 130
Asian American Literature

Works of Asian American literature by writers from the major ethnic subgroups, examined in their social, economic and historical contexts. Intertextual analysis of their thematic and formal elements to form an understanding of Asian American literary traditions.
ASA 131
Ethnicity, Culture, & the Self

Cultural and social psychological influences on Asian Americans focusing on the individual.
ASA 132
Health Issues Confronting Asian Americans & Pacific Islanders

Health issues confronting Asian Americans & Pacific Islanders.
ASA 141
Asian Americans & the Political Culture of Fashion in the U.S. & Asia

Historical, cultural and sociopolitical development of fashion in Asia and the U.S. as it relates to the Asian Diasporas. Specific aspects of material culture: textiles, clothing and fashion. 
ASA 150
Filipino American Experience

Examination of the relationship between the Filipino-American community, the Philippine home community and the larger American society through a critical evaluation of the historical and contemporary conditions, problems and prospects of Filipinos in the U.S.
ASA 150B
Japanese American Experience

Different analytical approaches to understand Japanese American history, culture and society.
ASA 150C
Chinese American Experience

Survey of the historical and contemporary experiences of Chinese in the United States, starting with the gold rush era and concluding with the present-day phenomenon of Chinese transnational movement to the United States and its diasporic significance.
ASA 150D
Korean American Experience

Interdisciplinary survey of the historical and contemporary experiences of Koreans in the United States from the late-19th century to the present.
ASA 150E
Southeast Asian American Experience

Historical survey of Southeast Asian experiences with special focus on United States involvement and post 1975 migrations. Defines international and transnational conditions that led up to the large exodus and resettlement of Southeast Asians.
ASA 150F
South Asian American History, Culture, & Politics

South Asian American experiences, focusing on the histories, cultures, and politics of Indian, Pakistani, Bangladeshi, and Sri Lankan communities in the U.S. Interdisciplinary approaches to migration, labor, gender, racialization, ethnicity, youth, community mobilization. 
ASA 155
Asian American Legal History

Legal history of Asian Americans, from the mid-19th century to present. Laws and administrative policies affecting Asian American communities, including those governing immigration, social and economic participation, WWII internment, and affirmative action.
ASA 189A
Topics in Asian American Studies: History

Intensive treatment of a topic in Asian American Studies; history.
ASA 189B
Topics in Asian American Studies: Culture

Intensive treatment of a topic in Asian American Studies; culture.
ASA 189C
Topics in Asian American Studies: Physical & Mental Health

Intensive treatment of a topic in Asian American Studies; physical and mental health.
ASA 189D
Topics in Asian American Studies: Policy & Community

Intensive treatment of a topic in Asian American Studies: policy and community.
ASA 189E
Topics in Asian American Studies: Comparative Racial Studies

Intensive treatment of a topic in Asian American Studies: comparative racial studies.
ASA 189F
Topics in Asian American Studies: Asian Studies & Asian American Studies

Intensive treatment of a topic in Asian American Studies: asian studies and asian american studies.
ASA 189G
Topics in Asian American Studies: Race, Class, Gender, & Sexuality

Intensive treatment of a topic in Asian American Studies: race, class, gender, and sexuality.
ASA 189H
Topics in Asian American Studies: Society & Institutions

Intensive treatment of a topic in Asian American Studies: society and institutions.
ASA 189I
Topics in Asian American Studies: Politics & Social Movements

Intensive treatment of a topic in Asian American Studies: politics and social movements.
ASA 194
Asian American Studies Capstone Course

Synthesis of the approaches and methods learned by students in Asian American Studies and development of specialization in their areas of interest. Development of a research proposal for thesis project.
ASA 195
Asian American Studies Senior Thesis Seminar

Synthesis of the approaches and methods learned in Asian American Studies. Production of an original research paper on a topic of student's interest, building on the research proposal submitted in the capstone seminar.
ASA 198F
Student Facilitated Course

Student-facilitated (taught) course intended for upper division students.
ASA 199FA
Student Facilitated Course Development

Under the supervision of a faculty member, an undergraduate student plans and develops the course they will offer under 098F/198F.
AST 010G
Introduction to Stars, Galaxies, & the Universe

Non-mathematical introduction to astrophysics of the Universe beyond our solar system using concepts of modern physics.
AST 010L
Observational Astronomy Lab

Introduction to observations of the night sky using small telescopes in nighttime laboratory.
AST 010S
Astronomy of the Solar System

Introduction to naked eye and telescopic observations of events in the night sky: positions of sun, moon, planets throughout the year.  Historical perspective on how our understanding of the solar system evolved to current non-mathematical astrophysical interpretation of planetary systems.
ATM 005
Global Climate Change

Scientific concepts needed to understand climate and climate change. Principles of regional variations in climate. Understanding observed seasonal, decadal and millennial changes. Analysis of the Antarctic ozone hole, El Nino and human-induced global warming. 
ATM 006
Fundamentals of Atmospheric Pollution

Effects of human emissions on the atmosphere: smog, ozone pollution, and ozone depletion; indoor air pollution; global warming; acid rain.  Impacts of these problems on the earth, ecosystems, and humans.  Strategies to reduce atmospheric pollution.
ATM 099
Special Study for Undergraduates


ATM 116
Modern Climate Change

Factors that determine the Earth’s climate, including natural and human-caused changes. Impacts of climate change. Possible future climates and policies to reduce human emissions of greenhouse gases.
ATM 245
Climate Change, Water & Society

Integration of climate science and hydrology with policy to understand hydroclimatology and its impact upon natural and human systems. Assignments: readings, take-home examination on climate and hydrologic science, paper that integrates course concepts into a research prospectus or review article.
ATM 270A
Topics in Atmospheric Science: Meteorological Statistics

Applications and concepts in meteorological statistics.
ATM 270B
Topics in Atmospheric Science: Computer Modeling of the Atmosphere

Applications and concepts in computer modeling of the atmosphere.
ATM 270C
Topics in Atmospheric Science: Design of Experiments & Field Studies in Meteorology

Applications and concepts in design of experiments and field studies in meteorology.
ATM 270D
Topics in Atmospheric Science: Solar & Infrared Radiation in the Atmosphere

Applications and concepts in solar and infrared radiation in the atmosphere.
ATM 270E
Topics in Atmospheric Science: Aerosol & Cloud Physics

Applications and concepts in aerosol and cloud physics.
ATM 270F
Topics in Atmospheric Science: Atmospheric Chemistry

Applications and concepts in atmospheric chemistry.
ATM 270G
Topics in Atmospheric Science: General Meteorology

Applications and concepts in general meteorology.
AVS 011
Introduction to Poultry Science

The mosaic of events that have tied poultry science to other scientific disciplines and poultry to humans. Poultry science techniques and production methods from the time of domestication to the present. One field trip required.
AVS 013
Birds, Humans & the Environment

Interrelationships of the worlds of birds and humans. Lectures, discussions, field trips and projects focus on ecology, avian evolution, physiology, reproduction, flight, behavior, folklore, identification, ecotoxicology and conservation. Current environmental issues are emphasized. Half-day field trip.
AVS 015L
Captive Raptor Management

Hands-on experience handling birds of prey. Students are taught all of the skills required to handle and care for raptors, including husbandry, biology, habitat requirements, cage design, veterinary care, rehabilitation methods, research potential and long-term care requirements. One Saturday fieldtrip.
AVS 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates


AVS 290
Seminar

Reports and discussions of recent advances and selected topics of current interest in avian genetics, physiology, nutrition, and poultry technology.
BAX 400
Foundations of Analytics

Focuses on teaching the fundamentals of R and SQL. Introduces the topic of numerical optimization, and review the concepts of linear algebra and calculus. 
BAX 400
Foundations of Analytics

Focuses on teaching the fundamentals of R and SQL. Introduces the topic of numerical optimization, and review the concepts of linear algebra and calculus. 
BAX 401
Introduction to Business Analytics

Introduction to the process of analyzing raw data to gain profitable business insight. Applications selected across organizational functions include prediction, process improvement, and general operational decision-making.   
BAX 401
Introduction to Business Analytics

Introduction to the process of analyzing raw data to gain profitable business insight. Applications selected across organizational functions include prediction, process improvement, and general operational decision-making.   
BAX 402
Organizational Issues in Implementing Analytics

Review the evolution of analytics in business, how to assemble and manage analytics teams, and the decision life-cycle. Emphasis on structuring communications to improve buy-in from peers and non-quantitatively-inclined colleagues.
BAX 402
Organizational Issues in Implementing Analytics

Review the evolution of analytics in business, how to assemble and manage analytics teams, and the decision life-cycle. Emphasis on structuring communications to improve buy-in from peers and non-quantitatively-inclined colleagues.
BAX 403
Organizational Effectiveness Workshop

Examine leadership, communication, and project management within the business, legal and societal contexts in which analytics is applied. Emphasis on privacy, data security, responsibility, and ethics.
BAX 411
Problem Structuring

Synthesize data-rich business challenges using analytic frameworks and techniques for modeling business problems. Emphasis on modeling uncertainty, optimizing multiple criteria, and building consensus.
BAX 421
Data Management

Introduction to the extraction, assembly, storage and organization of data in IT systems.
BAX 422
Big Data

Introduction to business applications involving standard, streaming, and network data.  Emphasis on scalable technologies for processing and analyzing big data for diverse applications.
BAX 422
Data Design & Representation

Introduction to business applications involving standard, streaming, and network data. Emphasis on scalable technologies for processing and analyzing big data for diverse applications.
BAX 423
Data Design and Representation 

Students learn computational reasoning about data representations by mapping conceptual data models to relational structures and analyzing database architectures and design tradeoffs.
BAX 423
Big Data

Learn computational reasoning about data representations by mapping conceptual data models to relational structures and analyzing database architectures and design trade-offs.
BAX 431
Data Visualization

Extract insights using visualization tools in R, Python, ManyEyes, HTML/CSS, etc. Standard (histograms, boxplots, and dashboards) and specialized (3D, animation, word clouds) formats are covered.
BAX 441
Statistical Exploration and Reasoning

Introduction to statistical reasoning and inference extraction from large data-sets. Students learn to obtain preliminary insights and form initial hypotheses through exploratory data analysis (EDA). 
BAX 441
Statistical Exploration & Reasoning

Introduction to statistical reasoning and inference extraction from large data-sets. Learn to obtain preliminary insights and form initial hypotheses through exploratory data analysis (EDA). 
BAX 442
Advanced Statistics

Continue exploring statistical reasoning using maximum likelihood estimation, Bayesian models, nonparametric models, Monte Carlo Markov Chain, time series, model specification, model selection, and dimension reduction.
BAX 443
Analytic Decision Making

Using spreadsheets and specialized modeling tools, explore structured problem solution through meta-heuristics, Monte Carlo simulation, and mathematical optimization. 
BAX 452
Machine Learning

Construct algorithms for learning from data and analyze the process for deriving business intelligence. Coverage of supervised and unsupervised learning, neural networks, etc.
BAX 453
Application Domains

Students explore contemporary and emerging domains for high-yield applications of analytics. Topics: social network analytics, search analytics, health care analytics, internet of things, supply chain/operations analytics, and marketing analytics.
BAX 461
Practicum Initiation

Students form teams, scope their project in light of team capability and business opportunity, create a preliminary structure and solution approach for the core problem, and assess data quality and project risks.
BAX 461
Practicum Initiation

Students form teams, scope their project in light of team capability and business opportunity, create a preliminary structure and solution approach for the core problem, and assess data quality and project risks.
BAX 462
Practicum Elaboration

Building on problems chosen in course 461, teams refine the business opportunity and draw insights from exploratory data analysis. 
BAX 462
Practicum Elaboration

Building on problems chosen in BAX 461, teams refine the business opportunity and draw insights from exploratory data analysis. 
BAX 463
Practicum Analysis

Implement selected analytic approaches through iteratively refining assumptions and analysis, synchronizing client requirements with model results, and creating minimum viable prototypes.
BAX 463
Practicum Analysis & Implementation

Focus on completing project deliverables by polishing statistical and non-statistical quantitative analysis, generating insights for technical and business stakeholders, integrating proposed solutions into partner workflows and organizations, and disseminating the findings and outcomes through presentations and publications.
BAX 464
Practicum Implementation

Project teams complete analysis, plan deployment and obtain client buy-in. Culminates in a project presentation, preferably including representatives from the client organization.
BAX 493
People Analytics

Students develop an understanding of how to position themselves as strategic partners in a company’s talent management efforts. Explore a range of topics related to people analytics, including hiring and selection, performance evaluation, training/development, promotion, compensation, social networks, diversity, and retention.
BAX 493A
Topics in Business Analytics - Cloud Computing 

Covers the foundations of cloud computing models including (Iaas) Infrastructure as a Service, (Paas) Platform as a Service, and Software as a Service (SaaS).
BAX 493B
Topics in Business Analytics - Implementing Machine Learning on the Cloud

Covers the four layers of Machine Learning in the cloud: AI services, ML services, ML Engines & Frameworks, and Infrastructure & Serverless Environments and how to implement solutions on all of the layers by using the best abstraction for the task at hand.
BIM 001
Introduction to Biomedical Engineering

Introduction to the field of biomedical engineering with emphasis on design, careers, and specializations, including (1) medical devices (2) cellular & tissue engineering, (3) biomechanics, (4) systems & synthetic biology, and (5) biomedical imaging.
BIM 088V
Introduction to Research

Introduction to types of research, including the basics of joint research with a faculty mentor. Self-assessments to identify areas of interest, priorities, and fit. Literature search and library skills used in early stages of research. Research safety, integrity, and intellectual property.
BIM 088V
Introduction to Research

Introduction to types of research, including the basics of joint research with a faculty mentor. Self-assessments to identify areas of interest, priorities, and fit. Literature search and library skills used in early stages of research. Research safety, integrity, and intellectual property.
BIM 099
Special Study for Undergraduates


BIM 190A
Upper Division Seminar in Biomedical Engineering

In depth examination of research topics in a small group setting. Question and answer session with faculty members.
BIM 198
Directed Group Study


BIM 209
Scientific Integrity for Biomedical Engineers

Scientific integrity and ethics for biomedical engineers, with emphasis and discussion on mentoring, authorship and peer review, use of humans and animals in biomedical research, conflict of interest, intellectual property, genetic technology and scientific record keeping.
BIM 218
Microsciences

Introduction to the theory of physical and chemical principles at the microscale. Scale effects, surface tension, microfluidic mechanics, micromechanical properties, intermolecular interactions and micro tribology.
BIM 233
Soft Tissue Mechanics

Presentation of structure and function of musculoskeletal soft tissues: cartilage, tendon, ligament, meniscus, and intervertebral disc. Instruction in engineering principals governing the mechanical behavior of these tissues: viscoelasticity, quasilinear viscoelasticity, and biphasic theory.
BIM 254
Statistical Methods in Genomics

Statistical approaches to problems in computational molecular biology and genomics; formulation of questions via probabilistic modeling, statistical inference methods for parameter estimation, and interpretation of results to address biological questions; application to high-impact problems in functional genomics and molecular biology.
BIM 257
Fundamentals of Tissue Optics & Biomedical Applications

Fundamentals of optical properties of tissue. Range of optical technologies and their applications to tissue characterization and diagnostics.
BIM 264
Synthetic & Systems Engineering of Cells

Introduction to the design, engineering, and control of biological systems for biotechnological applications and biological studies.
BIM 283
Advanced Design of Experiments for Biomedical Engineers

Provides biomedical engineering graduate students with the tools to properly design experiments, collect and analyze data, and extract, communicate and act on information generated.
BIM 288
Living Matter: Physical Biology of the Cell

Introduction to the origin, maintenance, and regulation of the dynamic architecture of the cell, including cellular modes of organization, dynamics and energy dissipation, molecular transport, motility, regulation, and adaptability.
BIM 290
Seminar

Seminar in biomedical engineering
BIM 295
Literature in Neuroengineering

Critical presentation and discussion of current literature in neuroengineering.
BIM 298
Directed Group Study

Directed group study in Biomedical Engineering.
BIM 299
Research


BIS 002A
Introduction to Biology: Essentials of Life on Earth

Essentials of life including sources and use of energy, information storage, responsiveness to natural selection and cellularity. Origin of life and influence of living things on the chemistry of the Earth. May be taught abroad.
BIS 002B
Introduction to Biology: Principles of Ecology & Evolution

Introduction to basic principles of ecology and evolutionary biology, focusing on the fundamental mechanisms that generate and maintain biological diversity across scales ranging from molecules and genes to global processes and patterns. May be taught abroad.
BIS 010
Everyday Biology

Everyday biological concepts using contemporary readings for non-scientists.  Key topics include: personal genomics; food and health; climate and evolution; brain biology and the law. Innovative projects apply biological concepts to current events. For students not specializing in biology.
BIS 015L
Introduction to Data Science for Biologists

Introduction to data science with a focus on developing practical computational skills for biologists. Data management, transformation, visualization, and analysis using R. Fundamentals of the UNIX shell including navigation and automation. Computational resources for biologists with emphasis on the management of genomic data.
BIS 181
Comparative Genomics

Comparison of genomes at the population and species level. Genomic  techniques for mapping disease (and other) genes, reconstruction of evolutionary history and migration patterns, determination of gene function, prediction of organismal traits, and metagenomics: determination of community composition and function.
BIT 001Y
Introduction to Biotechnology

Principles and technologies of biotechnology as applied to agriculture, the environment, and medicine. Business plans and presentation pitches for new biotechnology products. Bioinformatics approaches exploring genomic databases and DNA manipulations in silica.
BIT 091
Undergraduate Seminars in Biotechnology

Undergraduate oriented seminar series focused on biotechnology research and product development. Speakers from campus and the private sectors discuss ongoing research, product development and biotechnology careers.
BPH 288
Living Matter: Physical Biology of the Cell

Introduction to the origin, maintenance, and regulation of the dynamic architecture of the cell, including cellular modes of organization, dynamics and energy dissipation, molecular transport, motility, regulation, and adaptability.
BPH 293
Introduction to Research Topics

Presentation of current research activities of the Biophysics Graduate Group faculty. Facilitation of students in developing their research interest, and promoting collegial interactions.
BPH 298
Group Study


BPH 299
Research


BST 290
Seminar in Biostatistics

Seminar on advanced topics in the field of biostatistics. Presented by members of the Biostatistics Graduate Group and other guest speakers.
BST 298
Directed Group Study

Special topics in Biostatistics appropriate for group study at the graduate level. 
BST 299
Special Study for Biostat Graduate Students

Special topics in Biostatistics appropriate for directed individual study on advanced topics not otherwise covered in the Biostatistics curriculum.
CDM 002
Introduction to Technocultural Studies

Contemporary developments in the fine and performing arts, media arts, digital arts, and literature as they relate to technological and scientific practices.
CDM 003
Media Archaeology

Evolution of media technologies and practices beginning in the 19th century as they relate to contemporary digital arts practices. Special focus on the reconstruction of the social and artistic possibilities of lost and obsolete media technologies.
CDM 072
Introduction to Games

Introduction to the history, theory, and practice of play. Survey of both analog and digital games. Overview of gaming cultures, aesthetics, industries, and technologies.
CDM 113
Community Networks & Social Media

Impact and implications of computer-based networks in community, civic, and social life. Subjects may include community-access computer sites, neighborhood wireless networks, the digital divide, open-source software, and citizen action. 
CDM 121
Introduction to Sonic Arts

Introduction to the use of sound within the arts. Techniques and aesthetics of experimental contemporary practices. Creation of original sound works. 
CDM 123
Sight & Soundtrack

Use of sound to articulate, lend mood or subconsciously underscore visual, environmental, or performative situations, combining music, voice, sound effects and other noises to create sound designs that enhance, alter or support action and movement.
CDM 130
Fundamentals of Computer Graphics

Foundation course teaches the theory of three-dimensional computer graphics, including modeling, rendering and animation. Development of practical skills through the use of professional software to create computer graphics.
CDM 136
Electronics for Artists

Creative application of electronic technology relevant to media and fine arts involving both electronic principles and hands-on application.
CDM 156
Epic Television: The Golden Age of TV? Sopranos, Wire, Girls, Walking Dead 

Critically celebrated scripted television since the mid-1990s. Key themes including class, ethnicity, race, violence, and US politics. Major developments in the medium’s history as context for recent wave of epic television. 
CDM 158
Technology & the Modern American Body

History and analysis of relationships between human bodies and technologies in modern society. Dominant and eccentric examples of how human bodies and technologies influence one another and reveal underlying cultural assumptions.
CDM 163
Art & Cinema: Between the White Cube & the Black Box

Current debates between cinema studies and contemporary art. Issues covered include, experimental modes of filming, montaging, installing, screening, and displaying images between the White Cube (gallery/museum) and the Black Box (cinema).   
CDM 165E
Nazi & Fascist Cinema: Film & other Visual Media 

Analysis of nefarious and noxious cultural products in history: films made under the Nazis and other fascists, 1933-1945. Questions at heart of humanistic studies: relationship of culture to propaganda, politics, and even unfathomable crime. 
CGS 001
Introduction to Cognitive Science

Introduction to the interdisciplinary cognitive scientific approach to the study of mind, drawing concepts and methods from psychology, philosophy, linguistics, artificial intelligence, and other disciplines.
CHA 202
Microscopic Anatomy for Researchers

The growing importance of the use of gene knock-out studies and imaging technology requires significant understanding of basic anatomy. Designed to familiarize students in diverse fields with anatomical, cellular and tissue organization of typical animal models.
CHE 010
Concept of Chemistry

Survey of basic concepts and contemporary applications of chemistry. Designed for non-science majors and not as preparation for CHE  002A. 
CHE 221A
Special Topics in Organic Chemistry

Selected topics of current interest in organic chemistry. Topics will vary each time the course is offered, and in general will emphasize the research interests of the staff member giving the course.
CHE 221B
Special Topics in Organic Chemistry

Selected topics of current interest in organic chemistry. Topics will vary each time the course is offered, and in general will emphasize the research interests of the staff member giving the course.
CHE 221C
Special Topics in Organic Chemistry

Selected topics of current interest in organic chemistry. Topics will vary each time the course is offered, and in general will emphasize the research interests of the staff member giving the course.
CHE 221D
Special Topics in Organic Chemistry

Selected topics of current interest in organic chemistry. Topics will vary each time the course is offered, and in general will emphasize the research interests of the staff member giving the course.
CHE 221E
Special Topics in Organic Chemistry

Selected topics of current interest in organic chemistry. Topics will vary each time the course is offered, and in general will emphasize the research interests of the staff member giving the course.
CHE 221F
Special Topics in Organic Chemistry

Selected topics of current interest in organic chemistry. Topics will vary each time the course is offered, and in general will emphasize the research interests of the staff member giving the course.
CHE 221G
Special Topics in Organic Chemistry

Selected topics of current interest in organic chemistry. Topics will vary each time the course is offered, and in general will emphasize the research interests of the staff member giving the course.
CHE 221H
Special Topics in Organic Chemistry

Selected topics of current interest in organic chemistry. Topics will vary each time the course is offered, and in general will emphasize the research interests of the staff member giving the course.
CHE 245
Mechanistic Enzymology

Advanced topics in chemical kinetics relevant to enzymes, enzyme kinetics, theory of enzyme catalysis, and the analysis of a selection of organic enzyme reaction mechanisms by the tools introduced in the first part of the course.
CHE 293
Introduction to Chemistry Research

Designed for incoming graduate students preparing for higher degrees in chemistry. Group and individual discussion of research activities in the Department and research topic selection.
CHE 298
Group Study


CHE 299
Research

The laboratory is open to qualified graduate students who wish to pursue original investigation. Students wishing to enroll should communicate with the department well in advance of the quarter in which the work is to be undertaken.
CHI 010
Introduction to Chicana/o Studies

Analysis of the situation of the Chicana/o (Mexican-American) people, emphasizing their history, literature, political movements, education and related areas.
CHI 023
Qualitative Research Methods

Dominant models of qualitative inquiry in educational and social science research as well as mestizo approaches to research with latinos. Emphasis given to choosing and designing culturally appropriate strategies to investigate latino health, education, social context, and policy issues.
CHI 030
United States Political Institutions & Chicanas/os

Overview of the major political institutions and ideologies of the United States and the Chicana/o people's historical and contemporary role in, effects from, and responses to them. Theory, method and critical analysis.
CHI 042
Food Justice: Chicana/o & Indigenous Communities 

Issues surrounding food justice in Chicana/o and Indigenous Communities. Emphasis on discourses and practices of growing a food justice movement centered on the ecological care of the earth and decolonized environmental methodologies. 
CHI 050
Chicana & Chicano Culture

Interdisciplinary survey of Chicana/o cultural representation in the 20th century. Examines Chicana/o culture within a national and transnational context. Explores how Chicano cultural forms and practices intersect with social/material forces, intellectual formations and cultural discourses. (Former CHI 020.)
CHI 060
Chicana & Chicano Representation in Cinema

Introductory-level study of Chicana and Chicano representation in cinema. Depiction of Chicana and Chicano experience by Chicana/o filmmakers, as well as by non-Chicanos, including independent filmmakers and the commercial industry.
CHI 065
New  Latin American Cinema

Historical, critical, and theoretical survey of the cinemas of Latin America and their relationship to the emergence of U.S. Latino cinema. Emphasis on representation and social identity including gender, sexuality, class, race and ethnicity
CHI 070
Survey of Chicana/ o Art

Survey of contemporary Chicana/o art in context of the social turmoil from which it springs. Includes political use of the poster and the mural, the influence of the Mexican mural and graphic movement, and social responsibility of the artist.
CHI 073
Chicana/ o Art Expression Through Silk Screen

Introductory level studio course using silk screen and basic printing techniques to explore and develop images of Chicana/o cultural themes and expressions. Students experiment with images and symbols from their immediate environment/culture. Integrated approach to Chicana/o philosophy of art.
CHI 098
Directed Group Study


CHI 099
Special Study for Undergraduates


CHI 102A
Chicana/o Feminist Theoretical Understandings of K-20 Educational Disparities

Examination of educational disparities of the K-20 educational system. Chicana/o education theory and analysis with a specific emphasis on feminist frameworks and analytical tools used to guide and inform educational policy-making. 
CHI 102B
Grassroots Community Activism & Mobilization Efforts Challenging Educational Inequity

Exploration and research on effective grassroots community activism and mobilization efforts by Chicana/o students, along with their teachers, families, and other allies to protest structured inequality of the U.S. educational system. Mentoring and tutoring in a school under the supervision of a faculty member is required.
CHI 102C
Policy & Law Challenging Segregation & Educational Inequity

Focus on successful lawsuits against school segregation of Mexican-origin children in the United States. Mentoring and tutoring in a school under the supervision of a faculty member is required.
CHI 113
Latin American Women’s Engagement in Social Movements

Examination of how women of different racial/ethnic and class backgrounds in Latin America challenge their marginalization. Exploration of US foreign policy, its effects on Latin American’s institutions and on Latin American citizens. Using Chicana feminist perspective.
CHI 114
Women of Color Reproductive Health & Reproductive Politics in a Global Perspective

Study contemporary issues in reproductive health and reproductive politics, both globally and in the U.S., for women of color. 
CHI 114S
Women of Color Reproductive Health & Gender Politics in Cuba & the U.S.

Study of contemporary issues in reproductive health, reproductive politics, and gender politics both in Cuba and in the U.S., for women of color.  
CHI 122S
Psychology Perspectives Chicana/o & Latina/o Family

Role of migration and acculturation on family structure and functioning. From a psychological and Chicana/o Studies perspective, contemporary gender roles and variations in family structures are examined. Special topics include family violence, addiction, family resilience and coping strategies. May be taught abroad.
CHI 131S
Chicanas in Politics & Public Policy

Historical and political analysis of Chican/Latina political involvement and activities in the general political system, women's movement, Chicano/a movement. Examines the public policy process and the relationship of Chicanas/Latinas to public policy formation. May be taught abroad.
CHI 141
Community-Based Participatory Research & Chicana/o & Latina/o Health

Overview of CBPR, as well as methodological CBPR considerations in building community partnerships, community assessment, issue analysis, research planning, data gathering, and data sharing with Chicana/o and Latina/o communities in particular.
CHI 146S
Public Health in Latin America

Critical examination of emerging Public Health issues in Latin America in light of economic, political and social conditions. Contemporary behavioral frameworks used in public health. Includes analysis of clinical medicine and health care systems. 
CHI 147S
Indigenous Healing & Biodiversity in Latin America

Contrast between western and traditional healing practices in Latin America and the role of the natural environment in creating sustainable health delivery systems. Questions of health status attributable to public health and environmental risk factors. May be taught abroad.
CHI 148
Decolonizing Spirit

Legacies of colonization and decolonization; indigenous forms of spirituality and sacredness. Emphasis on remembering traditions, practices, relations, and forms of indigenous knowledge.
CHI 150
The Chicana & Chicano Movement

Development of the Chicano Movement within the context of the socio-political movements of the 1960’s in a national and global perspective. Ideological/political perspectives and the implications for political strategies.
CHI 157
Chicana & Chicano Narrative

Exploration of contemporary forms of the Chicana and Chicano narrative, encompassing visual art, fiction, poetry, film, theater, and creative nonfiction. Exposure to a variety of artists and scholars whose work shapes our evolving understanding of the Chicana/o experience.
CHI 161
Queer Latinidad

Introduction to queer Latina and Latino studies with a focus on Chicana and Chicano theory and cultural production.
CHI 170
Contemporary Issues in Chicano Art

Issues and conflicts in the dismantling of the Contemporary Chicano Art Movement.  Response and challenge to the dominant culture.
CHI 184
Latino Youth Gangs in Global Perspective

Comparative analysis of Latino youth gangs in Europe, Latin America, and the United States. Social, economic, political, and cultural factors leading to youth gangs as well as the responses are considered within a global perspective. 
CHI 184S
Latino Youth Gangs in Global Perspective

Comparative analysis of Latino youth gangs in Europe, Latin America, and the United States. Social, economic, political, and cultural factors leading to youth gangs as well as the responses to the youths are considered within a global perspective. May be taught abroad.
CHI 241
Community Based Health Research

Provides knowledge and skills to plan and implement public health projects that highlight the intersection of social determinants of health within a community empowerment framework. 
CHN 010
Modern Chinese Literature (In English)

Introductory course requiring no knowledge of Chinese language or history. Reading and discussion of short stories and novels and viewing of two films. Designed to convey a feeling for what China has experienced in the 20th century.
CHN 011
Great Books of China (in English)

Selected readings in English translation are supplemented with background information on periods, authors and the interrelationships of culture, literature and social change. Methods of analysis are introduced and applied in class discussions.
CHN 050
Introduction to the Literature of China & Japan

Methods of literary analysis and their application to major works from the various genres of Chinese and Japanese literature (in translation), including film. East Asian cultural traditions will also be introduced.
CHN 100B
Confucian Traditions

Key aspects of the Confucian tradition in dynastic China. Major themes addressed include ritual, classical studies, and Confucian influences on the Chinese family and state.
CHN 101
Chinese Film

English language survey of Chinese film, from its inception to the end of the 20th century. Chinese films as important texts for understanding national, transnational, racial, gender, and class politics of modern China.
CHN 102
Chinese American Literature (In English)

English language survey of Chinese American literature which reflects cultural roots in China before immigration and the diaspora experience in the United States after immigration. Memory, nostalgia, national identities, cross-cultural communication, globalization, and trans-national politics. 
CHN 102
Chinese American Literature (In English)

English language survey of Chinese American literature which reflects cultural roots in China before immigration and the diaspora experience in the United States after immigration. Memory, nostalgia, national identities, cross-cultural communication, globalization, and trans-national politics. 
CHN 103
Modern Chinese Drama

English language survey of modern Chinese spoken drama in the 20th century and its major playwrights, in the context of Chinese history and the interaction of Chinese culture with other cultures.
CHN 104
Modern Chinese Fiction (in English)

English language survey of Chinese fiction as it evolved amidst the great historical, social and cultural changes of the 20th century. Thorough study of the most influential writers and genres.
CHN 105
Western Influences on 20th-Century Chinese Literature (in English)

Introduction of Western literary thought into modern China, the experimentation with Western literary forms and techniques, and the development of Marxism in contemporary literary writing.
CHN 106
Chinese Poetry (in English)

Organized topically and chronologically, the lyric tradition is explored from the dawn of folk songs down to modern expressions of social protest. Topics include friendship, love, oppression, war, parting, death, ecstasy and beauty. All readings are in English.
CHN 107
Traditional Chinese Fiction (in English)

English-language course studying the dawn of Chinese fiction and its development down to modern times. Combines survey history with close reading of representative works such as The Story of the Stone andfamous Ming-Qing short stories.
CHN 108
Poetry of China & Japan (in English)

A comparative approach to Chinese and Japanese poetry, examining poetic practice in the two cultures; includes a general outline of the two traditions, plus study of poetic forms, techniques, and distinct treatments of universal themes: love, nature, war, etc.
CHN 109A
Topics in Chinese Literature: Crime & Punishment

Topics in Chinese literature; crime and punishment.
CHN 109C
Topics in Chinese Literature: Women Writers (in English) 

Topics in Chinese literature; women writers.
CHN 109D
Topics in Chinese Literature: The Knight-Errant (in English)

Topics in Chinese literature; the knight-errant. 
CHN 109E
Topics in Chinese Literature: The City in Fiction (in English)

Topics in Chinese literature; the city in fiction.
CHN 109G
Topics in Chinese Literature: The Literature of 20th-Century Taiwan (in English)

Topics in Chinese literature; the literature of 20th-century Taiwan.
CHN 109H
Topics in Chinese Literature: Popular Literature (in English)

Topics in Chinese literature; popular literature.
CHN 109I
Topics in Chinese Literature: Scholar & The Courtesan (in English)

Topics in Chinese literature; the scholar and the courtesan.
CHN 110
Great Writers of China: Texts & Context (in English)

Examination of major theoretical concepts and interpretive methods in the study of literature by using examples from the Chinese tradition; discussions of classical and modern works with an emphasis on the relations between literature, author, society, and culture.
CLA 001
Ancient Near East & Early Greece: 3000-500 B.C.E. 

Introduction to the literature, art, and social and political institutions of ancient Mesopotamia, Egypt, Palestine, and early Greece from 3000 to 500 B.C.E.
CLA 002
Ancient Greece & the Near East: 500-146 B.C.E.

Introduction to the literature, art and thought and the political and social institutions and values of Greece and its eastern Mediterranean neighbors-the Persians, Egyptians, and Judeans.
CLA 003
Rome & the Mediterranean: 800 B.C.E. -500 C.E.

Introduction to the history, literature, material culture, political and social institutions and values of Roman Civilization, with an emphasis on the development of the Roman Empire and the interactions of Roman culture with other Mediterranean cultures.
CLA 004
Late Antiquity

History and culture of the Roman and Byzantine empires from the 3rd to the 8th century. Transformation of the classical Mediterranean world through political and cultural interactions, rise of Christianity and Islam, beginning of the medieval period in Europe. 
CLA 010
Greek, Roman, & Near Eastern Mythology

Examination of major myths of Greece, Rome, and the Ancient Near East; their place in the religion, literature and art of the societies that produced them; their subsequent development, influence and interpretation.
CLA 010Y
Greek, Roman, & Near Eastern Mythology - Hybrid

Examination of major myths of Greece, Rome, and the Ancient Near East; their place in the religion, literature and art of the societies that produced them; their subsequent development, influence and interpretation.
CLA 015
Women & Gender in Classical Antiquity

Lives and roles of women and men in ancient Greece and Rome. Readings from history, philosophy, medical and legal documents, literature and myth.
CLA 020
Pompeii AD 79

Roman life in an urban community at the time of the eruption of Vesuvius. Slide presentations of the archeological evidence will be supplemented by selected readings from Petronius' Satyricon and other ancient authors.
CLA 025
The Classical Heritage in America

Classical heritage in the New World, with emphasis on the United States from its colonial past to the present day. The reception of Greco-Roman thought and values as expressed in art, architecture, education, law, government, literature, and film.
CLA 030
Greek & Latin Elements in English Vocabulary

Knowledge of Latin and Greek not required. Elements of Greek and Latin vocabulary for increased understanding of English word formation and improved ability to understand and retain unfamiliar words. Emphasis on Greek and Latin elements but other languages not neglected.
CLA 030F
Greek & Latin Elements in English Vocabulary

Knowledge of Latin and Greek not required. Elements of Greek and Latin vocabulary for increased understanding of English word formation and improved ability to understand and retain unfamiliar words. Emphasis on Greek and Latin elements but other languages not neglected.
CLA 031
Greek & Latin Elements in Technical Vocabulary

Knowledge of Greek and Latin not required. Elements of Greek and Latin vocabulary to increase understanding of English word formation in medical, scientific and technical terminology and improve ability to understand and retain unfamiliar terms.
CLA 035
Food & Wine in the Ancient Mediterranean

Social, political, and economic history of food and wine in ancient Mediterranean cultures. Development of agriculture and technology, trade, empires. Representation of food and wine in literary and visual arts, religious significance.
CLA 040
Life & Economy in the Ancient Mediterranean World

Characterization of ancient Mediterranean economies, with emphasis on Greece and Rome. Utilization of archaeological, art historical, and literary evidence. Craft production, labor specialization, trade networks, ancient technology, urban growth, agricultural productivity, coinage systems, and household economies.
CLA 050
Ancient Science

Study of science in ancient Greece and Rome; consideration of its social context; concentration on the basic concepts of physics, the world of medicine and biology, the history of mathematics, and the practices of astronomy, astrology and meteorology.
CLA 051
Ancient Medicine

Medicine in ancient Greece and Rome; physiological conceptions of the body within scientific and social frameworks; exploration of sanitation technology and health in antiquity; medical treatment of the female body; medicine and the economy.
CLA 103
Love & Beauty in the Ancient World 

Philosophical and literary traditions connecting love, beauty, and goodness in ancient thought. Moral and ethical implications, ideologies of sexuality and gender; transmission into the medieval and modern world.
CLA 111
Forms of Knowledge in the Ancient World

History of knowledge preservation and transfer in the ancient Mediterranean. Oral tradition, technology, innovations, forms of writing, libraries, ancient scholarship, cultural exchange and influence.
CLA 170
Cultural Interactions in the Ancient Mediterranean World

Exploration of the role of colonial encounters in the spread of ideas throughout the ancient Mediterranean from an archaeological and artistic perspective. Emphasis on material and literary expressions of culture, trade routes, and theories pertaining to culture contact.
CLA 172A
Early Greek Art & Architecture

Examination of the origin and development of the major monuments of Greek art and architecture from the 8th century to the mid-5th century B.C.
CLA 172B
Later Greek Art & Architecture

Study of the art and architecture of later Classical and Hellenistic Greece, from the mid-5th century to the 1st century B.C.
CLA 173
Roman Art & Architecture

Art and architecture of Rome and the Roman Empire, from the founding of Rome through the 4th century C.E.
CLA 175
Architecture & Urbanism in Mediterranean Antiquity

Architecture and urban development in the ancient Near East, Greece, and Rome. Special emphasis on the social structure of the ancient city as expressed in its architecture, and on the interaction between local traditions and the impact of Greco-Roman urbanism.
CLA 176
Roman Religions

Roman religion from republic to empire. Gods, rituals, and festivals at Rome; sacrifice, sacred places, magic. Gender roles, social status, national identity. Influences from other cultures, especially Egypt and the eastern Mediterranean.
CLA 201
Introduction to Classical Philology

Survey of major contemporary areas of classical scholarship with special attention devoted to current problems in literary and textual criticism.
CLA 202
Homer

Readings in the Iliad and Odyssey: the origins and transmission of thepoems.
CLA 203
Vergil

Reading of selected books of the Bucolics, Georgics, and Aeneid. Emphasis will be placed on the study of Vergilean poetic language.
CLA 204
Greek & Roman Comedy

Historical and critical problems in Aristophanes or New Comedy.
CLA 205
Latin Lyric & Elegy

Critical examination of the works of Catullus, Horace, or Propertius.
CLA 206
Greek Historiography

Development of historical writing in Greece.
CLA 207
Greek Drama

Literary and philological analysis of the plays of Euripides, Sophocles, or Aeschylus.
CLH 208
Introduction to Grant Writing, I

First in a two-quarter series. Scholars are encouraged to enroll in both classes. The two-course sequence provides training in practical aspects of competitive grant writing. The focus is NIH, but information will apply to other funding agencies.
CLH 212
Introduction to Stem Cell Biology

Introduction to Stem Cell Biology. Each week will focus on different aspects of stem cells, including general concepts, stem cells in lower organisms, embryonic stem cells and cellular reprogramming.
CLH 244
Introduction to Medical Statistics

Introduction to statistical methods and software in clinical, laboratory and population medicine. Graphical and tabular presentation of data, probability, binomial, Poisson, normal, t-, F-, and Chi-square distributions, elementary nonparametric methods, simple linear regression and correlation, life tables.
CLH 250
Integrating Medicine Into Basic Science

Four-week summer institute consisting of didactic lectures, reading assignments, group discussions, and clinical rotations to acculturate students to the human medical environment; integrate medical principles, physiology and pathophysiology into basic research; introduce high-impact clinical studies related to medicine and health.
CMN 001
Introduction to Public Speaking

Practice in the preparation and delivery of speeches based on principles and strategies of informing and persuading audiences drawn from the social sciences and humanities. 
CMN 003
Interpersonal Communication Competence

Communication competence in professional settings. Managing face-to-face and virtual teams. Leadership, conflict management and negotiation skills. Communication in diverse organizations. Leveraging communication networks. Effective interviewing.
CMN 003V
Interpersonal Communication Competence

Communication competence in professional settings. Managing face-to-face and virtual teams. Leadership, conflict management and negotiation skills. Communication in diverse organizations. Leveraging communication networks. Effective interviewing. 
CMN 003Y
Interpersonal Communication Competence

Communication competence in professional settings. Managing face-to-face and virtual teams. Leadership, conflict management and negotiation skills. Communication in diverse organizations. Leveraging communication networks. Effective interviewing.
CMN 005
Global English & Communication

English as a global language and its uses in intercultural communication. Cultural, historical, and political dimensions of varieties of English spoken around the world. Experiential grounding in strategies for increasing interpretive and verbal communicative competence for a globalized world.
CMN 010V
Introduction to Communication

Basic principles of communication and communication processes; models of communication; foundations of empirical research in communication; contexts of communication and communication research, including interpersonal, intercultural, news, entertainment, mediated, and others. 
CMN 010Y
Introduction to Communication

Basic principles of communication and communication processes; models of communication; foundations of empirical research in communication; contexts of communication and communication research including interpersonal, intercultural, news, entertainment, mediated, and others. 
CMN 012Y
Data Visualization in the Social Sciences

Introduction to quantitative data across the social sciences (Communications, Political Science, Psychology, Sociology, and other disciplines). Transforming data, describing data, producing graphs, visual reasoning, and interpretations.
CMN 076
Video Games & Virtual Environments

Impact of video games on players and society. Topics include motivations for playing games; cognitive, emotional, and behavioral effects, including violence and addiction; interpersonal and group processes in online games; virtual communities; and video games for education.
CMN 101
Communication Theories

Forms, functions, development, and testing of communication theory, with emphasis on social scientific approaches. Survey and comparison of significant micro and macro theories and models of face-to-face and mediated communication. Application of theories to real-world problems.
CMN 101Y
Communication Theories

Forms, functions, development, and testing of communication theory, with emphasis on social scientific approaches. Survey and comparison of significant micro and macro theories and models of face-to-face and mediated communication. Application of theories to real-world problems.
CMN 110
Communication Networks

Theoretical approaches to communication networks, practical applications of network studies, and network analysis tools. Friendship, political discussion, social support, organizational, social media, and disease transmission networks are examined. Impact of emerging technologies on network creation, maintenance, and expansion.
CMN 111
Gender Differences in Communication

Examination of communication differences between men and women as sources of male/female stereotypes, misunderstandings, dilemmas, and difficulties (real and imagined). Treatment of genders as cultures. Topics include male/female differences in discursive practices and patterns, language attitudes, and relationship dynamics.
CMN 112
Theories of Persuasion

Theories and models of persuasion that account for the effects of source, channel and audience factors on message recipients. Examination of message strategies for altering attitudes and gaining compliance. Contexts of application include interpersonal relationships, advertising, politics, and health.
CMN 114
Communication & Cognition

Relationship between communication and cognition in interpersonal and mediated contexts. Discourse comprehension and production, impact of language attitudes on social judgments, the effects of information processing on decision making.
CMN 120
Interpersonal Communication

Theories and principles of interpersonal communication related to perception, verbal and nonverbal channels, mutual understanding, and relationship development. Communication processes in face-to-face and technologically-mediated encounters. Consideration of different relationship contexts, including friendships, dating and family relationships, and the workplace. 
CMN 121
Language Use in Conversation

Examination of how people use language in social interaction, how they exchange meaning during conversation, and how their use of language plays a central role in turn-taking, speech acts, attitude formation, figurative speech, politeness, and other aspects of conversation.
CMN 122
Nonverbal Communication

Examination of the interaction between nonverbal communication and verbal communication channels in influencing outcomes in interpersonal relationships. Underlying functions served by nonverbal communication are considered.
CMN 123
Intercultural Communication 

Major concepts and theories of intercultural communication. Topics include cultural similarities and differences in verbal and nonverbal communication; dimensions of cultural variations, barriers to intercultural communication, and intercultural communication competence. 
CMN 124
Family Communication

Theories and research on family communication. Communication in courtship, marriage, and relational dissolution. Processes and outcomes of parent-child, sibling, family roles, and inter-generational communication. Interaction patterns associated with marital/family satisfaction, maintenance, divorce, and dysfunction. Cultural influences on family communication.
CMN 130
Group Communication

Communication processes in the development and maintenance of effective groups and teams in organizations. Examination of both face-to-face and computer-mediated group interaction. Topics include group development, power, norms, cohesion, decision making, problem solving, creativity, conflict management, working remotely, and leadership.
CMN 131
Strategic Communication in Public Relations

Principles, evolution, and professional practice of public relations. Planning and execution of effective, ethical communication strategies and campaigns. Distribution of messages through traditional and new media, including social media. Cultivation of relationships between organizations and their publics. Crisis communication management.
CMN 136
Organizational Communication 

Organizational communication theory and practice is examined with an emphasis on the use of effective communication strategies for achieving organizational goals. 
CMN 140
Introduction to Mass Communication

History of mass media and media research traditions. Organization and economics of the media industry. Media policy, law, regulation and ethics.  Impact of the media on individuals and society. Traditional, new and emerging communication technologies.
CMN 141
Media Effects: Theory & Research

Social scientific studies of the effects of mass media messages on audience members' actions, attitudes, beliefs, and emotions. Topics include the cognitive processing of media messages, television violence, political socialization, cultivation of beliefs, agenda-setting, and the impact of new technologies.
CMN 142
Newsmaking

The making of news. How journalists construct news and how consumers and newsmakers use it.  Effects of news, technology’s challenges to journalism, and the relationship of news to other institutions.
CMN 143
Analysis of Media Messages

Examination of alternative approaches to the analysis, interpretation, and evaluation of media messages, including those disseminated through broadcasting, print, and new technologies. 
CMN 144
Media Entertainment

Effects and appeal of media entertainment, emphasizing emotional reactions. Topics include key concepts of entertainment research such as mood management, and the respective features and emotional/social-psychological effects of genres such as comedy, mystery, thriller, sports, music, horror, and erotica.
CMN 145
Political Communication

Relationships among the mass media, citizens, and politics, production of political news, campaign strategies, and citizens’ attitudes and behaviors. Frameworks for mediated politics, the news, and elite discourse and campaign messages.
CMN 146
Communication Campaigns

Strategic uses of media and interpersonal communication channels in health, environmental advocacy, and political campaigns. Emphasis on general principles relevant to most campaign types, including public information, social marketing, and media advocacy campaigns. 
CMN 147
Children, Adolescents, & the Media

Research on the adaptive and maladaptive effects of media (e.g., television, movies, video games, social media) on the social, emotional, cognitive, and physical development of youth, considering the protective role of parents, teachers, ethics, and policy.
CMN 148
Contemporary Trends In Media 

Global trends in media, including media and globalization, impacts of the new media economy, media and security, and effects of ownership on media content and culture.
CMN 149
Race & Media

Examines how race and ethnicity as social categories are shaped by mass media. Focuses on the impact of race and ethnicity role portrayals in content and style of news, television and cinema. 
CMN 150V
Computational Social Science

Nontechnical survey of modern computational research methods. Web scraping, artificial intelligence, visualizing social networks, and computer simulations. Hands-on use of diverse software applications. Professors from all ten UC campuses contribute.
CMN 151
Simulating Communication Processes

Simulations of communication and sociality using agent-based models. Focus on strategic behavior, cooperation, coordination, self-organization, information diffusion, and other communication phenomena. No programming skills assumed.  
CMN 161
Health Communication

Health communication theories and research. Health literacy, social support and coping, doctor-patient interaction, health communication campaigns, media influences on health, and applications of new technologies in health promotion.
CMN 165
Media & Health

Content and effects of health messages in the media. Topics include health news reporting; portrayals of disease, disability, death and health-related behaviors; promotion of drugs and other health products; and tobacco and alcohol advertising.
CMN 170
Digital Technology & Social Change

Conceptual understanding of how digital communication technologies transform our lives through social media, mobile connectivity, globalization, and big data. Contexts include education, health, entrepreneurship, democracy, and poverty.
CMN 170V
Digital Technology & Social Change

Conceptual understanding of how digital technologies transform our lives, through social media, mobile connectivity, globalization, big data, and artificial intelligence. Context includes education, health, entrepreneurship, democracy, among others.
CMN 172
Interpersonal Technologies

Theories and research findings on how people use technologies for interpersonal and relational purposes, including impression formation, self-presentation, deception, anonymity, friendship maintenance, online dating, and emotional expression.
CMN 174
Social Media

Application of communication theories to the study and design of social media. Examination of social media in contexts such as political activism and collaboration. Topics include online credibility, participatory culture, viral media and privacy.
CMN 176
Video Games Theory & Research

Communication theory and research on the uses and effects of video games. Research methods available for investigating game use and the impact of games on behavior. Application of those methods in a research project.
CMN 178
Persuasive Technologies

Designing and testing ethical, technology-based communication interventions in the domains of health, marketing, education, and environment. Social media, mobile apps, wearable devices, recommendation systems, serious games, and augmented reality.
CMN 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates


CMN 204
Biological Foundations of Communication

Communibiological, evolutionary, neuroscience, and neurophysiological perspectives on communication. Methodologies for examining human physiological responses to messages, such as heart rate, skin conductance, electromyography, and cortical activity.
CMN 214
Analysis of Communication Networks

Theoretical and analytic issues pertaining to network perspectives on communicating and organizing. Consideration of structural and dynamic features of communication networks. Introduction to network analysis software and various analysis techniques.
CMN 233
Persuasive Technologies for Health

Theorizing, designing and evaluating ethical technology-based health communication interventions. Uses of social media, mobile communication apps, wearable devices, computer-generated tailored messages, educational games, and computational approaches in health promotion and healthcare delivery.
CMN 234
Intercultural Communication

Theories and research on intercultural communication. Topics include national, racial, and ethnic similarities and differences in communication  practices; cultural beliefs and values; identity and conflict; and technological influences on intercultural communication. Methodological issues in intercultural communication research are also examined.
CMN 243
Media & Health

Survey of research on media and health. Topics include health news coverage; depictions of health, illness and disability in entertainment; health campaigns; advertising of health products and services; and the influence of gaming and other new media on health behaviors.
CMN 251
Digital Technology & Social Change

Conceptual, theoretical, and international consideration of how digital communication technologies transform social organization and development. Topics include social media, big data, political revolutions, e-democracy, digital divide, e-education, e-health, entrepreneurship, public policies, poverty reduction, technological innovations, microfinance, and entertainment.
CMN 251Y
Digital Technology & Social Change 

Discussion and research on how digital technologies transform our lives through social media, mobility, big data, global connectivity, and artificial intelligence; changing business, health, democracy, globalization, families, dating, and education.
CMN 253
Children, Adolescents, & the Media

Theory and research on the uses and effects of traditional and new media on children and adolescents, emphasizing social, emotional, cognitive, and physical development. Methodological approaches and ethical issues in studies of underage populations. Parent and family mediation of effects.
CMN 255
Social Media

Theoretical, conceptual and analytic issues pertaining to social media research. Topics include motivation, participation, virality, and social-technical capital. Examination of social media in various contexts. Introduction to online behavioral data collection and analysis methods. 
CMN 256
Communication Perspective on Video Games

Review of theory and research on the uses and effects of video games and virtual environments developed for entertainment and education. Study of the research methods available for documenting and measuring game use and effects on behavior.
CMN 259
Cognitive Approaches to Media

Interdisciplinary examination of cognitive approaches to mediated communication. Application of studies on mediated message processing, cognitive and emotional information processing, psychophysiology, and neuroscience to mass communication. Review of media research and methods on attention, memory, motivation, and limited capacity.
CMN 260
Political Communication

Theories and research on the connections between media, politics, and citizens in the digital age. Critical framework for understanding the nature of mediated politics by assessing inter-relationships between production of news, political elites’ campaign strategies, and behaviors of citizens. 
CMN 270
Diffusion of Innovations

Communication processes by which information and innovations spread through social systems. Models of diffusion, including spatial, network, time dependent, semantic and cognitive frameworks. Impact of communication technologies on diffusion. Practical application of diffusion models in a variety of contexts.
CMN 275Y
Computational Social Science

Survey of modern computational research methods. Big data, social network analysis, machine learning, Agent-based computer simulations. Online lectures are taught by faculty from all 10 UC campuses. Local face-to-face discussion section.
CMN 284
Special Topics in Political Communication

Reading, discussion, research, and writing on a selected topic in the specialty of political communication.
CMN 298
Group Study


CMN 299
Individual Study


CNS 198
Directed Group Study


CNS 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates


CNS 299
Research


CNS 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum


COM 005
Fairy Tales, Fables, & Parables

Introduction to fairy tales, fables, and parables as recurrent forms in literature, with such readings as tales from Aesop & Grimm, Chaucer & Shakespeare, Kafka & Borges, Buddhist & Taoist parables, the Arabian Nights, and African American folklore.
COM 006
Myths & Legends

Introduction to the comparative study of myths and legends, with readings selected from Near Eastern, Teutonic, Celtic, Indian, Japanese, Chinese, African and Native American literary sources.
COM 007
Literature of Fantasy & the Supernatural 

Role of fantasy and the supernatural in literature: tales of magic, hallucination, ghosts, and metamorphosis, including diverse authors such as Shakespeare, P'u Sung-Ling, Kafka, Kawabata, Fuentes, and Morrison.
COM 009
The Short Story & Novella

Introduction to shorter forms of prose fiction by major authors of different countries, with special emphasis on the modern period.
COM 010A
Master Authors in World Literature: Gilgamesh, Ramayana, Beowulf, Nibelungenlied

Designed primarily to acquaint the non-literature major with a cross-section of writings by the world’s most important authors; readings in English translation. Content alternates among the following segments: Gilgamesh, Ramayana, Beowulf, Nibelungenlied.
COM 010B
Master Authors in World Literature: Metamorphoses, Decameron, Arabian Nights, Canterbury Tales

Designed primarily to acquaint the non-literature major with a cross-section of writings by the world’s most important authors; readings in English translation. Content alternates among the following segments: Metamorphoses, Decameron, Arabian Nights, Canterbury Tales.
COM 010C
Master Authors in World Literature: Chanson de Roland, El Cid, Igor’s Campaign, Morte D’Arthur

Designed primarily to acquaint the non-literature major with a cross-section of writings by the world’s most important authors; readings in English translation. Content alternates among the following segments: Chanson de Roland, El Cid, Igor’s Campaign, Morte D’Arthur.
COM 010D
Master Authors in World Literature: Sakuntala, Tristan & Isolde, Aucassin and Nicolette, Gawain & the Green Knight

Designed primarily to acquaint the non-literature major with a cross-section of writings by the world’s most important authors; readings in English translation. Content alternates among the following segments: Sakuntala, Tristan and Isolde, Aucassin and Nicolette, Gawain and the Green Knight.
COM 010E
Master Authors in World Literature: Swift, Rabelais, La Celestina, Simplicissimus

Designed primarily to acquaint the non-literature major with a cross-section of writings by the world’s most important authors; readings in English translation. Content alternates among the following segments: Swift, Rabelais, La Celestina, Simplicissimus. 
COM 010F
Master Authors in World Literature: Cervantes, Saikaku, Fielding, Voltaire

Designed primarily to acquaint the non-literature major with a cross-section of writings by the world’s most important authors; readings in English translation. Content alternates among the following segments: Cervantes, Saikaku, Fielding, Voltaire.
COM 010G
Master Authors in World Literature: Machiavelli, Shakespeare, Lope de Vega/Calderón, Molière/Racine, Lessing/Schiller (2)

Designed primarily to acquaint the non-literature major with a cross-section of writings by the world’s most important authors; readings in English translation. Content alternates among the following segments: Machiavelli, Shakespeare, Lope de Vega/Calderón, Molière/Racine, Lessing/Schiller. 
COM 010H
Master Authors in World Literature: Goethe, Byron, Stendhal, Pushkin, Lermontov

Designed primarily to acquaint the non-literature major with a cross-section of writings by the world’s most important authors; readings in English translation. Content alternates among the following segments: Goethe, Byron, Stendhal, Pushkin, Lermontov.
COM 010I
Master Authors in World Literature: Hoffmann, Gogol, Poe, Hawthorne, Maupassant, Chekhov, Melville

Designed primarily to acquaint the non-literature major with a cross-section of writings by the world’s most important authors; readings in English translation. Content alternates among the following segments: Hoffmann, Gogol, Poe, Hawthorne, Maupassant, Chekhov, Melville.
COM 010J
Master Authors in World Literature: Flaubert, Twain, Turgenev, Galdós, Ibsen

Designed primarily to acquaint the non-literature major with a cross-section of writings by the world’s most important authors; readings in English translation. Content alternates among the following segments: Flaubert, Twain, Turgenev, Galdós, Ibsen.
COM 010K
Master Authors in World Literature: Balzac, Dostoevski/Tolstoi, Hardy, Shaw, Strindberg

Designed primarily to acquaint the non-literature major with a cross-section of writings by the world’s most important authors; readings in English translation. Content alternates among the following segments: Balzac, Dostoevski/Tolstoi, Hardy, Shaw, Strindberg.
COM 010L
Master Authors in World Literature: Unamuno, Svevo, Conrad, Gide, Kafka, Faulkner

Designed primarily to acquaint the non-literature major with a cross-section of writings by the world’s most important authors; readings in English translation. Content alternates among the following segments: Unamuno, Svevo, Conrad, Gide, Kafka, Faulkner. 
COM 010M
Master Authors in World Literature: Rilke/Yeats, Joyce/Woolf, Mann/Céline, Bulgakov/Tanizaki, O’Neill/Brecht, Lorca/Pirandello

Designed primarily to acquaint the non-literature major with a cross-section of writings by the world’s most important authors; readings in English translation. Content alternates among the following segments: Rilke/Yeats, Joyce/Woolf, Mann/Céline, Bulgakov/Tanizaki, O’Neill/Brecht, Lorca/Pirandello.
COM 010N
Master Authors in World Literature: Camus/Sartre, García Márquez/Grass, Borges/Sarraute, Bellow/Nabokov, Beckett/Pinter, Genet/Dürrenmatt

Designed primarily to acquaint the non-literature major with a cross-section of writings by the world’s most important authors; readings in English translation. Content alternates among the following segments: Camus/Sartre, García Márquez/Grass, Borges/Sarraute, Bellow/Nabokov, Beckett/Pinter, Genet/Dürrenmatt.
COM 011
Travel & the Modern World

Examination of travel as a quintessential human activity and experience of global modernity and cross-cultural encounters from the 18th to the 21st century with an emphasis on German-speaking culture. Travelogues, literature, art, memoirs, and films in English translation.
COM 020
Humans & the Natural World

Changing relationship between humans and the natural environment in ancient and modern authors as Virgil, Li Po, Basho, Darwin, and Thoreau.
COM 053A
Literature of East Asia

Introduction to representative masterpieces of East Asia with readingsfrom such works as The Story of the Stone, The Peach Blossom Fan, T'ang and Sung poetry, classical Japanese poetry, drama, and travel diaries, and The Tale of Genji.
COM 053B
Literature of South Asia

Introduction to representative masterpieces of South Asia with readingsancient and modern India and Southeast Asia.
COM 053C
Literatures of the Islamic World

Introduction to classical Islamic culture through translations of literature primarily from Arabic and Persian, as well as other languages. Topics include the concept of the self, society and power, spirituality, the natural world, the cosmos, and the supernatural. 
COM 135
Women Writers

Exploration of women's differing views of self and society as revealed in major works by female authors of various times and cultures. Readings, principally of fiction, will include such writers as Lady Murasaki, Mme de Lafayette, and Charlotte Bronte.
COM 140
Thematic & Structural Study of Literature

Interpretation of selected works illustrating the historical evolution of themes, as well as of formal and structural elements.
COM 145
Representations of the City

Exploration of the representation of the city in major translated literary texts from a variety of literary traditions and periods. Emphasis on the diversity of urban experience in literature. Topics include public and private space, memory, and gender. 
COM 148
Mystical Literatures of South Asia & the Middle East

Exploration of the comparative mystical literatures of major religious traditions, with a focus on those produced in South Asia and the Middle East, although including other traditions. 
COM 155
Classical Literatures of the Islamic World 600-1900

Major texts from Arabic, Persian, Ottoman Turkish and Urdu literature with attention to historical and cross-cultural context. Includes epic, romance, various genres of lyric poetry, fairy tales, historical and religious stories, mystical and philosophical narratives, and essays.
COM 156
The Ramayana

Exploration of the Indian epic, Ramayana, through the lens of literature, performance, and visual art. Emphasis on the text's diversity and its contemporary global relevance. Topics include Ramayanas in Southeast Asia, and in various South Asian diaspora communities. 
COM 158
The Detective Story as Literature

Study of the origins, literary and social background, development andimplications of the literature of detection in a comparative context.
COM 160A
The Modern Novel

The changing image of man and his world as seen in novels by such writers as Joyce, Proust, and Mann.
COM 160B
The Modern Drama

Readings in representative authors such as Ibsen, Strindberg, Chekhov, Pirandello and Brecht.
COM 161A
Tragedy

Persistent and changing aspects of the tragic vision in literature from ancient times to the present.
COM 161B
Comedy

Comic attitudes towards life in literary works of different ages.
COM 162
Writing Love & War in South Asia

Comparative study of the themes and motifs of love and war in the literature of South Asia. Includes a discussion of Sanskrit epics, classical erotic court poetry, medieval heroic poetry, mystical compositions and colonial and post-colonial fiction.
COM 163
Biography & Autobiography

Portrayals of a human life in biographies and/or autobiographies of different countries and ages.
COM 164C
Baroque & Neoclassicism

Readings in major authors such as Calderón, Corneille, Pascal, Racine, Milton, and Grimmelshausen, with consideration of the tension between the expansive energies of the "baroque" and the restraints of dogma and reason.
COM 165S
Caribbean Literatures

Comparative approach to the multi-lingual, multi-cultural literatures of the Caribbean. Works from English, French, and Spanish speaking regions with special attention to problems of identity, diaspora and resistance, class, gender, race. May be taught abroad at the University of Havana, Cuba.
COM 166
Literatures of the Modern Middle East

Major translated works in modern Middle Eastern and North African Literature, including Arabic, Hebrew, Persian, and Turkish. Social and historical formation, with topics such as conflict and coexistence, journeys, and displaced people, gender and family.
COM 166A
The Epic

Study of various forms of epic poetry in both the oral and literary traditions.
COM 169
The Avant-Garde

Studies in movements such as surrealism, expressionism and the absurd.
COM 170
The Contemporary Novel

Study of important novels from different parts of the world, includingAsia, Africa, Latin America, Europe, and the United States, in the period from the Second World War to the present.
COM 171
Partition Literature: South Asia

An exploration of novels, short stories, plays, and films in translation and in English, produced about the Partition of India in 1947.
COM 172
A Story for a Life: The Arabian Nights

In-depth exploration of The Arabian Nights, the best-known work of pre-modern Arabic literature and a major work of world literature. Analysis of the work in its historical context and in comparison to other frame tales in world literature.
COM 175
Shahnameh: The Persian Book of Kings

In-depth analysis of the Persian Book of Kings (Shahnameh) by Abu al-Qasim Ferdowsi (d. 1020 CE) in its historical context with a comparative perspective on the role of this work in Persian and world literature.
COM 198
Directed Group Study for Advanced Undergraduates

Directed group study. May be taught abroad.
COM 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates


COM 250A
Research in Primary Literature

Individually guided research in the primary literature of concentration, under the supervision of a faculty member culminating in a conference paper. Required of M.A. and Ph.D. candidates.
COM 250B
Research in Second Literature

Individually guided research in the secondary literature of concentration, under the supervision of a faculty member, culminating in a paper. Required of Ph.D. candidates.
COM 250C
Research in Third Literature or Special Topic

Individually guided research, under the supervision of a faculty member, in the third literature of concentration or on a special topic culminating in a paper. Required of Ph.D. candidates.
COM 250D
Dissertation Prospectus 

Individually guided writing of the dissertation prospectus under supervision of a faculty member.  Must be taken prior to completion of the qualifying exam. Required of Ph.D. candidates.
COM 299
Individual Study


COM 299D
Special Study for the Doctoral Dissertation


COM 392
Teaching Internship in Comparative Literature

Regular consultations between the student instructor teaching Comparative Literature courses and a supervisor. Specifically designed for first-time TAs in COM 005, COM 006, COM 007, and COM 010. Instruction in the teaching of writing in a literature course, grading of papers, leading discussions.
CRD 001
The Community

Basic concepts of community analysis and planned social change. The dynamics of community change through case studies of communities including peasant, urban ghetto, suburban mainline, and Californiafarm workers.
CRD 002
Ethnicity & American Communities

Historical and cultural survey of the role of various ethnic groups in the development of American communities. Examines ethnicity as a cultural factor, ethnicity as power and issues related to selected American ethnic groups.
CRD 020
Food Systems

Social aspects of agri-food systems. Social science perspectives applied to food and agricultural sustainability in relation to ecology, knowledge, technology, power, governance, labor, social difference, and social movements. Social and environmental effects of commodity chains in comparative global context.
CRD 099
Special Study for Undergraduates


CRD 147
Community Youth Development

Community influences on youth well-being, youth as agents of community change, and policies to support healthy communities for young people. Special emphasis on disparities in youth well-being related to race, class, immigration status, gender, sexual-orientation. 
CRD 149
Community Development Perspectives on Environmental Justice

Environmental justice social movements; inequitable distribution of pollution on low-income communities of color; histories, policies, and innovations associated environmental justice movements in the United States and around the world.
CRD 157
Politics & Community Development

Analyzes political, economic and sociocultural forces shaping the form and function of local communities in the U.S. Considers theories of the state, the community and social change and case studies of actual community development in comparative historical perspective.
CRD 171
Housing & Social Policy

Social impact, economics, and politics of housing in the United States. Special attention given to federal, state, and local policy and program strategies to produce and preserve affordable housing and inclusive neighborhoods.
CRD 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates


CRD 200
Planning for Health

Focused on the intersection of city planning and public health. The health of an individual or community is determined not only by the health care they receive, but also by the natural, social, physical, economic, and political environment. Covers topics such as food access, air quality, water quality, waste and energy infrastructure, community engagement, and the planning process. Provides an overview of available public spatially explicit data. 
CRD 240
Community Development Theory

Introduction to theories of community development and different concepts of community, poverty, and development. Emphasis on building theory, linking applied development techniques to theory, evaluating development policy, and examining case studies of community development organizations and projects.
CRD 249
Media Innovation & Community Development

Role of innovative media in communities and social change. Studies historical, practical and theoretical issues involving media in community organizing, social justice movements, democracy initiatives, and economic justice.
CRD 260
Thesis Seminar

Workshop to help finalize thesis proposals and complete thesis.
CRD 290
Community Development Seminar

Speaker series on key topics in community development.
CRD 298
Group Study


CRD 299
Research


CRI 200A
Approaches to Critical Theory

Critical overview of modern theoretical texts (e.g., semiotics, hermeneutics, deconstruction, social and cultural critique, feminist theory, psychoanalysis).
CRI 200B
Problems in Critical Theory

Focused study of a particular critical theoretical approach, school or perspective. Topics may include but are not limited to: critical approaches to the study of literature, culture, film, historiography, visual culture, the body, and aesthetics.
CRI 202
Visual Culture

Analysis of image production in the contemporary world (photography, film, television, advertising, etc.) and their effects on individual subjectivities and collective social identities.
CST 298
Group Research


CST 299
Directed Research 


CTS 012
Introduction to Media Computation

Introduction to key computational ideas necessary to understand and produce digital media.  Fundamentals of programming are covered as well as analysis of how media are represented and transmitted in digital form. Aimed primarily at non-computer science students.
CTS 040A
Media History 1, Guttenberg to Oppenheimer

History of Media to 1945, with particular focus on mechanically reproduced mass media technologies including the printing press, the newspaper, photography, cinema, radio and early computing technology. Analysis of inter-related cultural and political topics. 
CTS 041B
History of Cinema from 1945 to the present

Examination of cinema in the postwar period. Study of world cinema trends and the economic and socio-political conditions enabling innovative work in the film industry.
CTS 116
Design on Screen

Analysis of the contribution of outstanding designers for cinema, television and filmed entertainment. Study of diverse aesthetic theories of production design and art direction, costume design, or cinematography. Introductory principles and practice, history. 
CTS 148B
Japanese Literature on Film

Survey of films based on works of Japanese literature, emphasis on pre-modern and early modern texts. Introduction to major directors of Japan, with a focus on cinematic adaptation. Lectures and readings in English. Films in Japanese with English subtitles.
CTS 150
Media Theory

Critical and theoretical approaches to the emergence of new technologies since the invention of photography. Examine various approaches to media (formalist, semiotic, structuralist, Frankfurt School, cybernetics, visual and gamer theory).
DER 475
Telehealth in Dermatology

Introduction to the application of telehealth in dermatology to provide diagnoses, consultation, treatment, and education. Participate in teledermatology clinics with remote sites throughout California, conduct telehealth project(s), and review the latest literature in telehealth application in improving healthcare access.  
DES 001
Introduction to Design 

Introduction to design discipline through readings, writing, visual problem solving, and critical analysis. Topics: design principles and elements, vocabulary, color theory, Gestalt principles, conceptualization strategies. Role of designer and products in contemporary culture including social responsibility and sustainability.
DES 040A
Energy, Materials, & Design Over Time

Global history of design across time, viewed through the lens of the effects of the creation and discovery of new energy sources, processes, and materials on design. 
DES 040B
Ideologies of Design

Introduction to the history and theory of design in particular relation to political, philosophical, cultural, economic, and environmental debates and objectives. 
DES 040C
Design for Aesthetics & Experience 

Global historical survey of design's engagement with changing notions of aesthetics and experience. Relates transformations in the theory, production, and reception of all aspects of design (objects, landscapes, architectures, etc.) to larger cultural, social, and political contexts.
DES 128
BioDesign Theory & Practice

Recent biological theories and their influence upon design theory and practice; includes bio-based materials in contemporary design. 
DES 142A
World Textiles: Eastern Hemisphere

Social contexts, meanings, aesthetics, stylistic developments, and methods significant in eastern hemisphere textiles.  Emphasis on Japan, China, Indonesia, Oceania, Southern and Central Asia, Africa.
DES 142B
World Textiles: Western Hemisphere

Social context, aesthetics, stylistic developments and methods significant in western hemisphere textiles.  Emphasis on the Middle East, Europe, and the Americas up to contemporary times. Two required field trips.
DES 143
History of Fashion

History of fashion design from the earliest times to the present focusing on the ancient Middle East and Common Era North America and Europe. Emphasis on aesthetic, functional, social, economic, political and cultural aspects of clothing and personal adornment.
DES 198F
Student-Taught Course

Student-facilitated (taught) course intended for upper division students
DES 199
Special Study of Advanced Undergraduates


DRA 001
Theatre, Performance & Culture

Introductory investigation of the nature of performance, moving from performance theory to consideration of various manifestations of performance including theatre, film and media, performance art, dance, sports, rituals, political and religious events, and other "occasions."  
DRA 001S
Theatre, Performance & Culture

Introductory investigation of the nature of performance, moving from performance theory to consideration of various manifestations of performance including theatre, film and media, performance art, dance, sports, rituals, political and religious events, and other "occasions."  For Short Term Programs Abroad; may be taught abroad.
DRA 002
Acting: The Basics: History & Practice

Introduction to the historical evolution of the actor – from ancient Greece & Asia to the Hollywood icon & postdramatic performer – and the practical foundations of acting for stage and screen. Onstage opportunities within lecture course structure.
DRA 005
Understanding Performance: Appreciation of Modern Theatre, Dance, Film & Performance Art for the Humanities & Sciences

Relevance of theatre and performance to modern culture, science and society. Approaches to theatre/dance/media/performance art, integrated into Mondavi Center for the Arts and Theatre & Dance Department programs.
DRA 010
Introduction to Acting

Fundamentals of movement, speech, theatre games, and improvisation. Selected reading and viewing of theatre productions. Intended for students not specializing in Dramatic Art.
DRA 011
Introduction to Presentation Skills

Development of clear oral and physical communication skills that build confidence, presentational style and clarity for students whose command of English is at a basic level.
DRA 014
Introduction to Contemporary Dance

Introduction to basic issues and methods in contemporary dance. Focus on preparing the student for dancing and dance-making through basic techniques of improvisation and composition. Consideration of dance asa cultural practice.
DRA 020
Introduction to Dramatic Art

Understanding and appreciation of both the distinctive and collaborative contributions of playwright, actor, director, and designer to the total work of dramatic art. Study of plays from the major periods of dramatic art in their cultural contexts.
DRA 021A
Fundamentals of Acting

Physical and psychological resources of the actor. Experience in individual and group contact and communication, theatre games, advanced improvisation, sound and movement dynamics. Viewing of theatre productions.
DRA 024
Visual Aspects of Dramatic Art

Understanding and appreciation of the visual aspects of dramaticart: theatre architecture, scenery, lighting, costume, and makeup.
DRA 025
Technical Aspects of Dramatic Production

Technical principles of dramatic production emphasizing the three areas of scenic, costume and lighting studios. Subjects covered include basic tools, materials and equipment, production practices; and the interdisciplinary and collaborative nature of dramatic production.
DRA 026
Performing Arts Production Management

Theoretical study of performing arts administration and backstage operations from audition through performance. Techniques of scheduling,disabilities and emergency procedures.
DRA 028
Entertainment Engineering & Management: Stagecraft to Stage Management

Introduction to  technical production and management in theatre and dance. Topics include stage management, theatrical mechanics, backstage protocols, scenic construction, properties, lighting, basic shop tools, costume shop use and construction, basic make-up, sound equipment, graphics and robotics for theatre.
DRA 040A
Beginning Modern Dance

Fundamentals of modern dance focusing primarily on the development of techniques and creative problem solving. Basic anatomy, dance terminology, and a general overview of modern dance history. 
DRA 041A
Beginning Jazz Dance

Fundamentals of jazz dance; includes warm-ups, dance techniques and combinations. Basic anatomy, dance terminology and general overview of jazz dance history.
DRA 042A
Beginning Ballet

Fundamentals of ballet, focusing on the development of technique through proper alignment, quality, and rhythm. Basic anatomy, ballet terminology, and dance history. 
DRA 043A
Contact Improvisation Dance

Fundamentals of contact improvisation and its applications to all forms of dance, performance, sports, physical safety and health.  Solo improvisation, safety, communication, alignment, basic lifting and weight-sharing, intuition, developing relaxed readiness and personal expression.
DRA 044A
Beginning Hip Hop Dance

Fundamentals of Hip Hop dance focusing on developing a fluid movement vocabulary, facility in body isolations, intricate rhythmic patterning, quick shifts of weight and mastering dance combinations. Discussions on Hip Hop dance history, styles and terminology.
DRA 055
Contemporary Local, National & Global Theatre, Dance & Performance

Introduction a range of contemporary theatre, dance and performance in local, national and international settings. Training in critical  approaches to and aesthetic appreciation of these forms. Emphasis varies based on instructor.
DRA 056A
History of Theatre & Dance I: Myth, Magic & Madness

Exploration of aesthetic movements in various disciplines of theatre and dance from the origins to 1550. Examination of Greek, Roman, Sanskrit, Kathakali, Chinese, Japanese, Mesoamerican, Medieval European, and Indigenous theatre and dance including oral, ritual and shamanic performance. Offered once a year.
DRA 056B
History of Theatre & Dance II: Romance, Revenge & Rebellion

Exploration of aesthetic movements in various disciplines of theatre and dance from 1550-1850. Examination of genres related to romance, revenge and rebellion using European, North and South American, and Asian examples. Offered once a year. 
DRA 056C
History of Theatre & Dance III: Sex, Society & the State

Exploration of aesthetic movements in various disciplines of theatre and dance from 1850-1968. Examination of melodrama, popular theatre, naturalism, psychological realism, and the avant-garde using European, North and South American, Asian, and African examples. Offered once a year.
DRA 098
Directed Group Study

Primarily for lower division students.
DRA 099
Special Study for Undergraduates


DRA 111
Advanced Presentation Skills

Development of clear oral and physical communication skills that build confidence, presentational style and clarity for students whose command of English is at a competent to fluent level.
DRA 111S
Representation & Identity in Culture & Cinema

Issues of personal and collective identity via study of film narratives from different cultures. Reflection of dominant cultural identities in film. May be taught abroad in Australia.
DRA 115
Advanced Study of Major Film Makers

Analysis of the contribution of some outstanding film creators. Study of diverse aesthetic theories of the cinema and their application to selected films. 
DRA 116
Design on Screen

Analysis of the contribution of outstanding designers for cinema, television and filmed entertainment. Study of diverse aesthetic theories of production design and art direction, costume design, or cinematography. Introductory principles and practice, history.
DRA 126
Principles of Performing Arts Stage Management

Stage management principles for theatre, dance, musical theatre, music, and concerts. The dynamical role of the stage manager in the performing arts, upper-management team.  
DRA 128
Principles of Theatre Sound

Fundamentals of sound, sound equipment, and sound design as used in modern theatre and other performance venues. Assembly, set-up, and operation of basic theatre sound reinforcement system, recording system, and theatrical playback system.
DRA 141
Introduction to the Fundamentals of Movement

Introduction to fundamentals of movement that combines intellectual and kinesthetic understanding of the body's skeletal and muscular systems. Explorations based on theories of various body mind specialists including Laban, Feldenkrais, Bartenieff and Sweigard as well as the eastern discipline of Yoga.
DRA 142
History of Modern Dance

Modern Dance tradition, focusing on its theorizations of individual and social identity. Students will write and choreograph analyses of principle dances in this tradition.
DRA 144
Introduction to Traditional Chinese Physical Culture

Traditional Chinese Wushu practices, explored through practical work in dance laboratory conditions. Integration of practice with conceptual analysis; contemporary social, educational and artistic applications.
DRA 144A
Introduction to Traditional Chinese Embodied Culture

Traditional Chinese Wushu practices, explored through practical work in dance laboratory conditions. Integration of practice with conceptual analysis; contemporary social, educational and artistic applications.
DRA 150
American Theatre & Drama

The history of the theatre from Colonial times to the present. Readings of selected plays.
DRA 151S
Australian Performance & Culture

Australian performance and theatre practices as a product of its culture of origin. Relationships between art and society. May be taught abroad in Australia.
DRA 154
Asian Theatre & Drama: Contexts & Forms

Selected Asian plays and performance forms in their cultural and artistic contexts; myth, ritual and the theatre; performance training, visual presentation of the text; political theatre; intercultural performance-the fusion of Asian and Western traditions.
DRA 155
Representing Race in Performance

Representation and performance of "race" in American culture featuring different sub-headings such as "African American Theatre" or "Asian-Americans on Stage." 
DRA 155A
African American Dance & Culture in the United States, Brazil & the Caribbean

Comparative study of the African American dance forms in the U.S.A., Brazil, Haiti, Cuba, Jamaica, Barbados, and Trinidad. Examination of ritual, folk, and popular dance forms and the socio/historical factors that have influenced these forms.
DRA 155B
Ancient & Contemporary Greek Theatre & Dance

Origins of early theatres and the first actors, playwrights and dancers and their powerful influence on western performance and thought up to present day. Offered in Greece.
DRA 156AN
Performance Analysis

Performance on the stage, in the street, in everyday life, ritual, and in politics. Satire, irony, creative protest and performance. Social movements, the state, and performance as tactical intervention. 
DRA 156B
Theatre in History & Place: Local, National & Global Conditions for Production

Exploration of local, national and global issues in theatre production, with special attention to historical changes in social and political contexts for performance. 
DRA 156C
Modern Aesthetic Movements in Performance 

Important movements in performance, especially theatre and dance, from realism to the present. Primary emphasis on Western traditions though others may be studied. 
DRA 156D
Theatre History Through Shakespeare

Shakespeare's plays, theatre history, and theatre today. European contexts from 1590-2004 and international theatre from 20th century. Stagecraft, different media (print, stage, film), social/political environments, design, and cultural change (gender, sexuality and ethnicity).
DRA 158
Performance Studies Undergraduate Seminar

Focused inquiry into a particular genre, period, movement, artist, or theme in performance. Philosophical and aesthetic issues as well as historical and cultural performance contexts. In-depth research projects in relationship to the subject of inquiry.
DRA 159
Contemporary Experimental Performance, Theatre & Drama

Evaluation and examination of the "New Theatre;" its experimental and innovative nature since the 1960s. Dance, film, stage, performance art and public acts of a performative nature.
DRA 159S
Contemporary Experimental Performance, Theatre & Drama

Evaluation and examination of the "New Theatre;" its experimental and innovative nature since the 1960s. Dance, film, stage, performance art and public acts of a performative nature. May be taught abroad.
DRA 170
Media Theatre

New media and application of in theatre devising and performance. Emphasis on collaborative process in relationship to integration of emerging technologies and formation of new theatrical works. Development of collaborative performance through lecture, demonstration, improvisation and experimentation.
DRA 192
Internships in Theatre & Dance

Theatre production experience in creative, technical or management areas.  Experience in galleries, performance sites, or theatre/dance/physical theatre companies.
DRA 192S
Internships in Theatre & Dance

Theatre production experience in creative, technical or management areas. Experience in galleries, performance sites, or theatre/dance/physical theatre companies. May be taught abroad in Sydney, Australia.
DRA 195
Senior Capstone Experience

Capstone experience for majors. Examination, reflection and synthesis on development. Discussion of professional development and translatable skills. Individual project and development of portfolio.
DRA 200
Methods & Materials in Theatre Research

Essential research tools in theatre and related fields; bibliographies, primary sources; methods of evaluating and presenting evidence; delineating research areas in the field.
EAD 290
Seminar


EAD 298
Group Study


EAD 299
Research


EAE 001
Introduction to Aerospace Science Engineering

Description of the field of aerospace engineering with examples from industry, government, and research. Aerospace engineering principles, ethics, and responsibilities.
EAE 010
From the Wright Brothers to Drones & Quadcopters

History of aircraft and its influence on society. Topics covered will include Unmanned Aerial Vehicles, safety considerations, economics and privacy issues. Aerodynamics, stability and control will also be introduced. 
EAS 088
Korean Culture & Society: From Ancient Three Kingdoms to the Global K-Pop

Evolution of Korean society from Three Kingdoms period (B.C.E 57 to C.E. 676) to the contemporary era emphasizing the perseverance and transformations of traditional social and cultural patterns.
EBS 001
Foundations of Biological Systems Engineering

Introduction to engineering and the engineering design process with examples drawn from the field of biological systems engineering. Introduction to computer-aided design and mechanical fabrication of designs. Quarter-long group design project.
EBS 099
Special Study for Lower Division Students


EBS 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates


EBS 298
Group Study


EBS 299
Research


ECH 001
Design of Coffee–An Introduction to Chemical Engineering

Non-mathematical introduction to how chemical engineers think, illustrated by elucidation of the process of roasting and brewing coffee. Qualitative overview of the basic principles of engineering analysis and design. Corresponding experiments testing design choices on the sensory qualities of coffee.
ECH 001
Design of Coffee–An Introduction to Chemical Engineering

Non-mathematical introduction to how chemical engineers think, illustrated by elucidation of the process of roasting and brewing coffee. Qualitative overview of the basic principles of engineering analysis and design. Corresponding experiments testing design choices on the sensory qualities of coffee.
ECH 001Y
Design of Coffee–An Introduction to Chemical Engineering

Non-mathematical introduction to how chemical engineers think, illustrated by elucidation of the process of roasting and brewing coffee. Qualitative overview of the basic principles of engineering analysis and design. Corresponding experiments testing design choices on the sensory qualities of coffee.
ECH 080
Chemical Engineering Profession

Professional opportunities and professional responsibilities of chemical engineers. Opportunities and needs for post-baccalaureate education.  Relationship of chemical engineering to contemporary issues.  
ECH 090X
Honors Discussion Section

Examination of special topics covered in selected lower division courses through additional readings, discussions, collaborative work, or special activities which may include projects, laboratory experience or computer simulations.
ECH 190X
Honors Discussion Section

Examination of special topics covered in selected upper division courses through additional readings, discussions, collaborative work, or special activities which may include projects, laboratory experience or computer simulations.
ECH 200
Preparing for Graduate Student Success

Introduction to the soft-skills and campus resources needed to succeed in graduate school.  Emphasis on the student-mentor relationship and the process of selecting a research mentor.
ECH 290
Seminar

Seminar.
ECH 299
Research

Research.
ECI 016
Spatial Data Analysis

Computer-aided design and geographic information systems in civil engineering practice.
ECI 137
Construction Principles & Project Management

Project management, with civil engineering construction and design applications, including project scope, schedule, resources, cost, quality, risk, and control. Construction industry overview. Interactions between planning, design, construction, operations. Construction operations analysis. Contract issues. Project management software, field trips, guest lectures.
ECI 165
Transportation Policy

Transportation and associated environmental problems confronting urban areas, and prospective technological and institutional solutions. Draws upon concepts and methods from economics, engineering, political science and environmental studies.
ECI 214
Probabilistic Seismic Hazard Analysis & Design Ground Motions

Probabilistic seismic hazard analysis for use in developing design spectra and for seismic risk analyses, including the development of earthquake ground motion time series for use in dynamic analyses of structures.
ECI 244A
Life Cycle Assessment for Sustainable Engineering

Life cycle assessment methodology. Emphasis on applications to infrastructure and energy systems. Life cycle design, life cycle cost methods, other tools from industrial ecology, and links to policy.
ECI 246N
Understanding Climate Change: Causes & Consequences

Diverse physical processes that govern climate and drive climate change. Observational, experimental and modeling techniques and methods used in the development of our scientific understanding of the Earth system. 
ECI 254
Exploring Data from Built Environment Using R 

Introduction to modern data science, specifically data acquisition, exploratory data analysis, visualization, and beginning data analysis using R. Emphasizes computational reasoning and working with tabular and non-standard data. Focus will be on data generated in the built environment.
ECI 290
Seminar

Discussion of current graduate research, and guest lectures on recent advances. Oral presentation of individual study. Required of graduate degree candidates.
ECI 290C
Graduate Research Group Conference

Research problems, progress, and techniques in civil engineering.
ECI 296
Topics in Water & Environmental Engineering

Seminars presented by visiting lecturers, UC Davis faculty, and graduate students.
ECI 299
Research


ECL 212A
Environmental Policy Process

Introduction to selected topics of the policy process and applications to the field of environmental policy. Develops critical reading skills, understanding of policy theory, and an ability to apply multiple theories to the same phenomena.
ECL 212B
Environmental Policy Evaluation

Method and practice, philosophical basis, and political role of policy analysis. Reviews basic concepts from economic theory; how and why environmental problems emerge in a market economy; and tools necessary for solving environmental problems. 
ECL 232
Theoretical Ecology

Examination of major conceptual and methodological issues in theoretical ecology. Model formulation and development will be emphasized. Topics differ from year to year.
ECL 245
Climate Change, Water & Society

Integration of climate science and hydrology with policy to understand hydroclimatology and its impact upon natural and human systems. Assignments: readings, take-home examination on climate and hydrologic science, paper that integrates course concepts into a research prospectus or review article.
ECL 298
Group Study


ECN 001A
Principles of Microeconomics

ECN 001A & ECN 001B may be taken in either order. Analysis of the allocation of resources and the distribution of income through a price system; competition and monopoly; the role of public policy; comparative economic systems.
ECN 001AV
Principles of Microeconomics 

Analysis of the allocation of resources and the distribution of income through a price system; competition and monopoly; the role of public policy; comparative economic systems.
ECN 001B
Principles of Macroeconomics

ECN 001A & ECN 001B may be taken in either order. Analysis of the economy as a whole; determinants of the level of income, employment and prices; money and banking, economic fluctuations, international trade, economic development; the role of public policy.
ECN 201A
History of Economic Thought

Economic thought from the classical Greece era to modern times.
ECN 201B
History of Economic Thought II

Origins and emergence of modern economic analysis.
ECN 210A
Economic History

Economic history of the eastern hemisphere in the modern period. Medieval Europe or other regions may be studied, depending on student interest.
ECN 210B
Economic History

The United States from Colonial times to the present. Other areas of thewestern hemisphere may be studied, according to student interest.
ECN 233
Poverty & Public Policy

Interdisciplinary course covering qualitative and quantitative U.S. based poverty research. Topics include measurement, statistics, theories and evidence on the causes and consequences of poverty, and the history and efficacy of major anti-poverty programs. 
ECN 235D
Macroeconomics

Selected topics in Macroeconomics.
ECN 280
Orientation to Economic Research

Bridge the gap between students' classwork and their subsequent research. Topics such as the origination of a research project, some mechanics of empirical research and hints on the submission of research papers.
ECN 299D
Dissertation Research


ECS 012
Introduction to Media Computation

Introduction to key computational ideas necessary to understand and produce digital media. Fundamentals of programming are covered as well as analysis of how media are represented and transmitted in digital form. Aimed primarily at non-computer science students.
ECS 015
Introduction to Computers                                 

Computer uses in modern society. Emphasis on uses in non-scientific disciplines. Includes word processing, spreadsheets, web-page creation, elementary programming, basic computer organization, the Internet, the uses of computers and their influence on society. Not intended for Computer Science or Computer Science & Engineering majors.
ECS 032A
Introduction to Programming

Introduction to programming and problem solving in Python. Aimed primarily at non-major students. 
ECS 032A
Introduction to Programming

Introduction to programming and problem solving in Python. Aimed primarily at non-major students. 
ECS 098
Directed Group Study


ECS 164
Human-Computer Interaction

Introduction to concepts and practice of modern human-computer interaction design. 
ECS 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates


ECS 199FA
Student Facilitated Course Development

Under the supervision of a faculty member, an undergraduate student plans and develops the course they will offer under 098F/198F.
ECS 221
Computational Methods in Systems & Synthetic Biology

Computational methods related to systems and synthetic biology. An overview of machine learning techniques related to the analysis of biological data, biological networks. Predictive modeling and simulation of biological systems. Topics on biological circuit construction.
ECS 290
Seminar in Computer Science

Participating seminar; discussion and presentation of current research and development in computer science.
ECS 290C
Graduate Research Group Conference

Research problems, progress and techniques in computer science.
ECS 299
Research


EDU 081
Learning in Science & Mathematics

Exploration of how students learn and develop understanding in science and mathematics classrooms. Introduction to case studies and interview techniques and their use in K-6 classrooms to illuminate factors that affect student learning.
EDU 100
Introduction to Schools

Study of occupational concerns of teachers; skills for observing classroom activities; school organization and finance; school reform movement; observing, aiding, and tutoring in schools.
EDU 110
Educational Psychology: General

Learning processes, cognitive development, individual differences, testing and evaluation.
EDU 114
Quantitative Methods in Educational Research

Problems and methods in data analysis. Design of research projects. Some consideration of procedures suited to digital computers.
EDU 115
Educating Children with Disabilities

Educational issues and processes involved in teaching children with disabilities. Focuses on the structure of special education, with an emphasis on meeting the educational needs of children who are mainstreamed in regular classes.
EDU 119
The Use and Misuse of Standardized Tests

Principles underlying educational and psychological testing. Purposes of testing for individual achievement and evaluation of school programs. Interpretation and misinterpretations of outcomes. Analysis of SAT, GRE and other common tests. Experience in test administration and outcome interpretation. 
EDU 119
Use & Misuse of Standardized Tests

Principles underlying educational and psychological testing. Purposes of testing for individual achievement and evaluation of school programs. Interpretation and misinterpretations of outcomes. Analysis of SAT, GRE and other common tests. Experience in test administration and outcome interpretation. 
EDU 120
Philosophical & Social Foundations of Education

Philosophical, historical, and sociological study of education and the school in our society.
EDU 121
Introduction to Education Policy Analysis: Tools, Methods & Frameworks

Introduces students to the field of education policy analysis with a specific emphasis on the quantitative frameworks and analytical tools—drawn primarily from economics and statistics—that are used to guide and inform educational policymaking.
EDU 122
Children, Learning & Material Culture

How material artifacts shape what and how children learn in school, at home, and in the community. Artifacts examined include books, computers, household appliances, toys and games, entertainment media, collectibles, sports equipment, clothing, folk arts and crafts, and neighborhood space.
EDU 130
Issues in Higher Education

Analysis of current issues in higher education and of some practical implications of varying philosophical approaches to the role of the university.
EDU 142
Introduction to Environmental Education

Study of history, philosophy, principles and approaches to environmental education (EE) and outreach; learning theories, teaching strategies and techniques in EE and outreach; evaluation of EE curricula in non-formal and in-school contexts; observing, aiding and facilitating local environmental education programs.
EDU 147
Anglos, Latinos & the Spanish Black Legend: Origins & Educational Implications of Anti-Hispanic Prejudice

Examination of anti-Hispanic prejudice in the United States focusing on the "Black Legend," a 16th-century, anti-Spanish myth underpinning the doctrine of "Manifest Destiny." Exploration of the Legend's presence in contemporary American society through interviews and analysis of school textbooks.
EDU 150
Cultural Diversity & Education in a Sociopolitical Context

Introduction to cultural diversity and education in a sociopolitical context. Interactive course. Small and large-group discussions explore, extend, and apply readings; range of writing genres for responses to assignments and course themes; lectures, slide shows, speakers, brief fieldwork, and presentations.
EDU 151
Language Development in the Chicano Child

Bilingualism, first and second language acquisition, bilingual education, language assessment, Chicano Spanish and the role of dialect varieties in the classroom.
EDU 163
Guidance & Counseling

Nature and scope of pupil personnel services; basic tools and techniques of guidance; theory and practice of counseling psychology, with emphasis on educational and vocational adjustment.
EDU 185
Learning in a Digital Age: Information, Schooling, & Society

Focus on the changing nature of learning in a digital age: social media, ubiquitous connectivity, online education, electronic communication, writing, gaming, and youth culture. Readings drawn from major recent works detailing fundamental shifts in information, schooling, and society.
EDU 202N
Computer Analysis of Qualitative Data

Critical and practical understanding of how to use computer software programs to analyze qualitative data (text, images, and videotape) in conducting social research.
EDU 205A
Ethnographic Research in Schools I: Current Theory & Practice

Current literature from anthropology and society related to schools.Emphasis on the organizational structure of institutions,and the analysis of face-to-face interaction. Explore the relationship between field-based research and theory development on the acquisition of knowledge in specific social and cultural contexts.
EDU 209
Image-Based Field Research

Critical and practical understanding of video tape and still photography as resources for enhancing field research in schools and other social setting.
EDU 210
Psychological Perspectives on School Learning 

Study of human learning theory and research related to learning of academic content. Review of contemporary issues of constructivism, problem solving, expertise, conceptual change, transfer, and metacognition.
EDU 211
Sociocultural & Situative Perspectives on Learning & Cognition

Sociocultural and situative theories of cognition and learning. Major ideas of L.S. Vygotsky, followed by modern perspectives: situated cognition, cognitive apprenticeship, situated learning, communities of practice, cultural-historical activity theory, and distributed cognition. Implications of each theoretical perspective for educational practice.
EDU 220
Concepts & Methods of Policy Analysis

Introduction to concepts and methods of policy analysis. Emphasis on the relationship between educational issues and problems; policy development; constructing persuasive policy analyses; issues related to policy process. 
EDU 222
School Change & Educational Reform

Analysis of models, processes, and case studies of school change and educational reform with respect to variable characteristics of schools and schooling, planned and unplanned change, the moral evaluation of school change, and the role of educational research.
EDU 225
Education Policy & Law

Examination of law as an instrument of social policy. Specific focus on the legalization of education decision making, its causes, dimensions, and effects on administrative and teacher authority.
EDU 228
Politics & Governance of Education 

Examination of political power, representation, influence, decision-making and inter-governmental relations in the public schools. 
EDU 229
Education Finance Policy

Examination of (1) United States financing public education, (2) the relationship between school finance and education policy, and (3) the relationship between education finance and education practice. 
EDU 230
Special Topics in Education Policy

Selected topics in education policy. Designed to facilitate preparation for the qualifying examination or dissertation. Critically analyze scholarly work including their own works in progress.
EDU 235
Critical Pedagogy

A socio-cultural critique, from an interdisciplinary perspective, of educational reform and change. The critique will include an analysis of the influence of text content on the perpetuation of social power differences.
EDU 237
Survey Research Methods

Theories, principles and application of survey research methodology. Students develop, validate, and administer survey instruments; select representative samples; conduct focus groups; and collect, organize, and analyze survey data. Familiarity with introductory concepts in descriptive and inferential statistics is assumed.
EDU 244
Topical Seminar in Language, Literacy & Culture

Critical study of selected issues of language, literacy, and culture as they relate to education.
EDU 244
Topical Seminar in Language, Literacy & Culture

Critical study of selected issues of language, literacy, and culture as they relate to education.
EDU 245
Theory & Research in Early Literacy

Analysis of children's initial processes in learning to read extending from the preschool years into second grade. Topics include emergent literacy, phonological awareness, word recognition, decoding, spelling, vocabulary, comprehension, second language reading, assessment, intervention, and instruction.
EDU 247
Research on Response to Culturally Diverse Literature, K-12

Research on response to culturally diverse literature in classrooms and other K-12 settings. Topics include reader response theories, values in expanding the literary canon, problems of cultural authenticity, resistance to multicultural literature, and instruction for diverse texts and learners.
EDU 248
Academic Language & Literacies

Exploration of theories and research on academic language and literacies for the schooling of first and second language learners. Students use basic qualitative methods to collect and analyze classroom language and literacy data.
EDU 251
Research in Bilingual & Second Language Education

Discussion and analysis of recent research in bilingual and second language education. Topics include:language acquisition in second language learners and bilinguals, second language teaching methods, language-use models in bilingual education, interaction analysis in bilingual/cross-cultural classrooms,use of the vernacular in classrooms.
EDU 262B
Research Topics in Science Education II

Current research issues and activities in science education: status, trends, theories and hypotheses. Formulation of research questions, design of studies and critical, in-depth review of literature related to the student's research interests.
EDU 270
Research on Teacher Education & Development

Research on teacher preparation in university credential programs and on professional development of in-service teachers, with special attention to teacher preparation for work with culturally and linguistically diverse youth. 
EDU 271
Supervision of Student Teachers: Research, Theory & Practice

Research, theory and practice in the preparation and supervision of teachers. Practice in the supervision of candidates in university teaching credential programs during the student teaching field placement and the mentoring of novice teachers by expert teachers.
EDU 294
Special Topics in Science, Agriculture & Mathematics Education

Critical study of special topics of research relevant to science, agricultural and mathematics education. Students and faculty present work-in-progress on a major research project, and critically analyze and discuss one another's developing scholarly work.
EDU 295
Special Topics in Learning & Mind Science

Critical study of selected issues in the learning sciences, neurodevelopmental disorders, and psychometrics and measurement, as they relate to education.
EDU 320
Creating Classroom Communities

Observation of classrooms at beginning of academic year for first-hand experience with teachers’ approaches to creating communities and setting routines. Candidates are placed with students they will teach during student teaching. Candidates may take on teaching tasks as appropriate. 
EEC 001
Introduction to Electrical & Computer Engineering

Electrical & Computer Engineering as a professional activity. What Electrical & Computer Engineers know and how they use their knowledge.
EEC 001
Introduction to Electrical & Computer Engineering

Introduction to Electrical & Computer Engineering with focus on sub-disciplines of Electrical & Computer Engineering, engineering design, and problem solving. Microcontrollers, analog circuits, signal processing, and communications links. Application of topics to create a functional device.
EEC 007
Introduction to Programming & Microcontrollers

Programming computers using C/C++ languages. Software engineering and object-oriented design. Programming for hardware devices.
EEC 099
Special Study for Lower Division Students


EEC 105A
EE-Emerge 1

Work in groups to conceive, design and prototype electronic exhibits to promote engineering to the public.   
EEC 105B
EE-Emerge 2

Work in groups to construct electronic exhibits.
EEC 223
RF Integrated Circuits for Wireless Communications

Integrated RF front end circuit design of receivers and synthesizers for wireless communications, such as LNA, mixers, PLL; noise and linearity analysis and specifications; theory and working mechanism of synthesizers and phase noise analysis.
EEC 231A
Plasma Physics & Controlled Fusion I

Equilibrium plasma properties; single particle motion; fluid equations; waves & instabilities in a fluid plasma; plasma kinetic theory & transport coefficients; linear & nonlinear Vlasov theory; fluctuations, correlations & radiation; inertial & magnetic confinement systems in controlled fusion.
EEC 244B
Microsciences

Introduction to the theory of physical and chemical principles at the microscale. Scale effects, surface tension, microfluidic mechanics, micromechanical properties, intermolecular interactions and micro tribology.
EEC 255
Robotic Systems

Introduction to robotic systems.  Mechanical manipulators, kinematics, manipulator positioning and path planning.  Dynamics of manipulators.  Robot motion programming and control algorithm design.
EEC 290
Seminar in Electrical & Computer Engineering

Discussion and presentation of current research and development in Electrical & Computer Engineering.
EEC 299
Research


EGG 201
Life Cycle Assessment for Sustainable Engineering

Life cycle assessment methodology. Emphasis on applications to infrastructure and energy systems. Life cycle design, life cycle cost methods, other tools from industrial ecology, and links to policy. 
EME 001
Mechanical Engineering

Description of the field of mechanical engineering with examples taken from industrial applications, discussions of the practice with respect to engineering principles, ethics, and responsibilities.
EMR 405A
Fundamentals of Point-of-Care Ultrasound

First in a longitudinal elective course spanning the first two years of medical school. Introduces the fundamental concepts and technique of ultrasonography in preparation for patient assessment during clinical work. Through a series of lectures accompanied by hands-on practice sessions and case challenges, spaced teaching and deliberate practice, students will grasp the fundamentals of diagnostic ultrasound and solidify their knowledge of key medical science concepts.
EMR 405B
Fundamentals of Point-of-Care Ultrasound

Second longitudinal elective course spanning the first two years of medical school. Introduces the fundamental concepts and technique of ultrasonography in preparation for patient assessment during clinical work. Through a series of lectures accompanied by hands-on practice sessions and case challenges, spaced teaching and deliberate practice, students will grasp the fundamentals of diagnostic ultrasound and solidify their knowledge of key medical science concepts.
EMR 450
Ambulatory Elective in Emergency Medicine 

Credit will be given for approved non-AI Emergency Medicine courses at other institutions to which there is not an equal learning experience at UC Davis.  
EMS 002
Materials Marvels: The Science of Superheroes

Introduction to science and technology of materials as key engineering ingredients. Explores the relationship between art and materials, and how superheroes are both products and resources of ideas for new materials' technologies.
EMS 200
Preparing for Graduate Student Success

Introduction to the soft-skills and campus resources needed to succeed in graduate school. Emphasis on the student-mentor relationship and the process of selecting a research mentor.
EMS 268
Advanced Materials Characterization

Fundamental working principles for characterization methods used in structural and compositional analysis of engineering materials. Topics include x-ray, electron, ion, and neutron interactions with materials and techniques include diffraction, spectroscopy, and imaging methods.
EMS 288
Living Matter: Physical Biology of the Cell

Introduction to the origin, maintenance, and regulation of the dynamic architecture of the cell, including cellular modes of organization, dynamics and energy dissipation, molecular transport, motility, regulation, and adaptability.
EMS 294
Materials Science Seminar

Current literature and developments in materials science with presentations by individual students.
EMS 298
Group Study

Group study.
ENG 001
Introduction to Engineering

Introduction to the role of engineers in the acquisition and development of engineering knowledge, the differences and similarities among engineering fields, and the work ethic and skills required for engineering.
ENG 002
Creativity & Entrepreneurship for Engineers

Introduction to entrepreneurial thinking from an engineer's perspective. Focus on identifying entrepreneurial opportunities, developing prototypes, and generating business models. Emphasis on developing a creative and entrepreneurial mindset.
ENG 004
Engineering Graphics in Design

Engineering design, descriptive geometry, pictorial sketching, computer-aided graphics, and their application in the solution of engineering problems.
ENG 008
Introduction to Entrepreneurship

Students from all majors will learn the processes involved in modern entrepreneurship and identify an opportunity for innovation. The 3 C's of the entrepreneurial mindset (developed by KEEN) will be covered: Curiosity, Connections, and Creating Values. 
ENG 098
Directed Group Study


ENG 190
Professional Responsibilities of Engineers

Organization of the engineering profession; introduction to contracts, specifications, business law, patents, and liability; discussion of professional, ethical, societal, and political issues related to engineering.
ENG 198
Directed Group Study

Directed group study. May be taught abroad.
ENH 001
Introduction to Environmental Horticulture/Urban Forestry

Introduction to the use of plants to enhance the physical, visual and social environment, the use of ecological principles in developing sustainable, low maintenance landscape systems, and the career opportunities in these areas.
ENH 006
Introduction to Environmental Plants

Classification, nomenclature and variation of environmental plants. The use of floral and vegetative characteristics and terminology to key unknown plants. Characteristics of plant groups and basics of climate, soils and plant selection. Identification of 150 common landscape plants.
ENL 003A
Writers' Workshop

Focuses on the development of writing and revision strategies, exploring ways to understand a writing task; to develop appropriate content for a writing task; to revise content to reflect competence as a communicator.
ENL 051
Hot Bars, Supreme Lyrics, & Rhymes for Days: Hip Hop as Poetry

Literary approaches to hip hop as poetry. Formal examination of rap lyrics in relation to technology, visual expression, dance, and knowledge production. Historical and cultural consideration of race, ethnicity, gender, urban culture, and politics.
ENL 052
Pop Culture Shakespeare

Critical approaches to the study of Shakespeare’s afterlife in contemporary American media. Focus on visual, audio, and kinesthetic modes of analysis and presentation. Relation of Shakespeare to contemporary society, politics, media, and economics.
ENL 053
Youth in Revolt

American literary and cultural representations of adolescence as a time of rebellious refusals and wild behaviors in relation to questions of gender and sexuality, psychological states, economic pressures, racial inequality, and methods of discipline and punishment.
ENL 072
Introduction to Games

Introduction to the history, theory, and practice of play.  Survey of both analog and digital games. Overview of gaming cultures, aesthetics, industries, and technologies.
ENL 099
Special Study for Undergraduates


ENL 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates


ENL 205
Anglo-Saxon Language & Culture

The language and culture of Anglo-Saxon England; readings in Old English prose and poetry. 
ENL 207
Middle English

Study of the phonology, morphology, syntax, and lexicon between 1100 and 1500 with investigation of the regional dialects; pertinent facts on both the internal and external linguistic history; intensive reading of texts.
ENL 230
Study of a Major Writer

Artistic development of one major writer and his intellectual and literary milieu. 
ENL 232
Problems in English Literature

Selected issues in the current study and critical assessment of a limited period or topic in English literature. 
ENL 233
Problems in American Literature

Selected topics for intensive investigation.
ENL 234
Dramatic Literature

Historical introduction to dramatic theory; the genres of tragedy, comedy, and tragicomedy.
ENL 240
Medieval Literature

Studies of Medieval literature. Course materials to be selected by the instructor. Preparation and evaluation of research papers. 
ENL 242
16th-Century Literature

Studies in 16th-century literature. Course materials to be selected by the instructor. Preparation and evaluation of research papers. 
ENL 244
Shakespeare

Studies in Shakespeare. Course materials to be selected by the instructor. Preparation and evaluation of research papers. 
ENL 246
17th-Century Literature

Studies in 17th-century literature. Course materials to be selected by the instructor. Preparation and evaluation of research papers. 
ENL 248
18th-Century Literature

Studies in 18th-century literature. Course materials to be selected by the instructor. Preparation and evaluation of research papers. 
ENL 250
Romantic Literature

Studies in Romantic literature. Course materials to be selected by the instructor. Preparation and evaluation of research papers. 
ENL 252
Victorian Literature

Studies in Victorian literature. Course materials to be selected by the instructor. Preparation and evaluation of research papers. 
ENL 254
20th-Century British Literature

Studies in 20th-century British literature. Course materials to be selected by the instructor. Preparation and evaluation of research papers.
ENL 256
Early American Literature

Studies in Early American literature. Course materials to be selected by the instructor. Preparation and evaluation of research papers.
ENL 258
American Literature: 1800 to the Civil War

Studies in American literature from 1800 to Civil War. Course materials to be selected by the instructor. Preparation and evaluation of research papers. 
ENL 260
American Literature: Civil War to 1914

Studies in American literature from the Civil War to 1914. Course materials to be selected by the instructor. Preparation and evaluation of research papers. 
ENL 262
American Literature after 1914

Studies in American literature after 1914. Course materials to be selected by the instructor. Preparation and evaluation of research papers. 
ENL 264
Studies in Modern British & American Literature

Studies in modern British and American literature. Course materials to be selected by the instructor. Preparation and evaluation of research papers. 
ENL 275
Proseminar in Research Practices

Study of various practical and technical skills needed to perform research in literary studies. Materials to be selected by the instructor. Evaluation based on student projects that involve hands-on application of skills taught in the proseminar.
ENL 280
Seminar in Research Practices

Study of various practical and technical skills needed to perform research in literary studies. Course materials to be selected by the instructor. Evaluation based on student projects that involve hands-on application of skills taught in the seminar. 
ENL 285
Literature by Women

Studies in literature by women and the theoretical approaches to literature by women. Course materials to be selected by the instructor. Preparation and evaluation of research papers.
ENL 288
Prospectus Workshop

Training in writing the dissertation prospectus. Participation in group discussions of preparatory assignments and final proposal.
ENL 298
Directed Group Study


ENL 299
Individual Study


ENL 299D
Special Study for the Doctoral Dissertation


ENT 001
Art, Science & the World of Insects

Fusion of entomology and art to create an appreciation of insect biology, ecology, interactions with humans and importance in human culture. Multidisciplinary approaches in education and career paths in entomology and art will be highlighted.
ENT 002
Biodiversity

Introduction to nature, scope and geographical distribution of biodiversity (diversity of life, with emphasis on plants and animals, especially insects).Humans and biodiversity - domestication, aesthetics, ethics and valuation.Species richness and "success".Biodiversity through time; monitoring, evaluation and conservation.Biomes-global, continental and Californian.
ENT 010
Natural History of Insects 

Introduction to the insects detailing their great variety, structures and functions, habits, and their significance in relation to plants and animals including man. Designed for students not specializing in entomology.
ENT 099
Special Study for Undergraduates 


ENT 119
Apiculture 

Biology and behavior of honeybees; communication, orientation, social organization, foraging activities, honey production, pollination activities. 
ENT 197T
Tutoring in Entomology

Leading small discussion groups. Preview assignments and prepare guidelines for discussion. 
ENT 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates 


ENT 290
Exploratory Topics in Entomology 

Interdisciplinary topics in entomology, including innovative applications of entomological concepts to other fields of research and human endeavor (e.g. medicine, technology, art, criminology).
ENT 297N
Seminar in Entomology 

Weekly Entomology seminar.
ENT 298
Group Study 


ENT 299
Research


ENV 200B
Environmental Policy Evaluation

Method and practice, philosophical basis, and political role of policy analysis. Reviews basic concepts from economic theory; how and why environmental problems emerge in a market economy; and tools necessary for solving environmental problems. 
ENV 200C
Environmental Policy Process

Introduction to selected theories of the policy process and applications to the field of environmental policy. Develops critical reading skills, understanding of policy theory, and an ability to apply multiple theories to the same phenomena.
ENV 202
Strategies of Environmental Administration & Management

Bureaucracy and public management, organizational theory, analysis of environmental management by US agencies, NGOs, and business. Overview of natural resource management, analyzes the strengths and limitations of different administrative approaches.
EPI 205B
Integration of Epidemiologic Concepts

In-depth analysis and integration of basic epidemiologic concepts and approaches to epidemiologic research presented in  MPM 405/EPI 205A, with more mathematical and theoretical basis and examples from veterinary and human medicine, including outbreak investigation, infectious disease epidemiology, properties of diagnostic tests, study design, and surveillance.
EPI 209
History of Epidemiology in Public Health

Introduction to the history of epidemiology in solving major public health problems. Original historical articles will be read/discussed. Topics may include: infectious disease, accidents/adverse events, nutritional deficiencies, community vaccination trials, occupational exposures, cancer, birth defects, cardiovascular disease, and smoking. 
EPI 224
Health & Ecological Risk Analysis

Methodological approach to risk analysis for human and animal-related health and ecological issues. Basic principles of risk analysis, including perception, communication, assessment and management. Emphasis on the assessment of risk.
EPI 229
Geographic Information Systems for Health Professionals 

Emphasis on basic geographic and data management principles. Focus on software proficiency in application to analyzing/solving health-related problems. For graduate and professional students in epidemiology, public health, preventive veterinary medicine, health informatics with interest in spatial techniques in research. 
EPI 240
Principles of Injury Epidemiology

Overview of the epidemiology of human injury, including general principles, surveillance methods, behavioral factors, environmental factors, treatment issues and engineering and legal interventions related to vehicular injuries, drownings, falls, fires and burns, poisonings, firearm injuries, and other intentional injuries.
EPI 260
Epidemiology of Chronic Diseases & Aging

Overview of the epidemiology of chronic disease in old age. Topics include biology of aging, epidemiology of cardiovascular disease, neoplasms, osteoporosis and fractures, psychosocial factors and health in old age, dementias, functional status and prevention of disease.
EPI 290
Seminars in Epidemiology 

Faculty and students will present and lead discussion of ongoing or published epidemiologic research.
EPI 291
Seminars in Human Health Services Research & Clinical Epidemiology

Critical review, evaluation, and discussion of research in health services and clinical epidemiology. Presentation of statistical, epidemiologic, and econometric methods. Students present their own research and critique the work of others.
EPI 298
Group Study

Group study in selected areas of epidemiology.
EPI 299
Research

Research in selected areas of epidemiology.
ESM 008
Water Quality at Risk

Natural and human threats to water quality. Balance of science and policy in all aspects of attaining, maintaining, and managing water quality, water contamination. Decoding popular media coverage of water quality and water contamination.
ESM 198
Directed Group Study


ESP 198
Directed Group Study


ESP 212A
Environmental Policy Process

Introduction to selected theories of the policy process and applications to the field of environmental policy. Develops critical reading skills, understanding of policy theory, and an ability to apply multiple theories to the same phenomena.
ESP 212B
Environmental Policy Evaluation

Method and practice, philosophical basis, and political role of policy analysis. Reviews basic concepts from economic theory; how and why environmental problems emerge in a market economy; and tools necessary for solving environmental problems.
ESP 298
Directed Group Study


ETX 010
Introduction to Environmental Toxicology

Hazardous substances, their effects on humans and their actions and movement in the environment. Emphasis on substances of current concern. 
ETX 020
Introduction to Forensic Science

Basic principles of forensic science, types of information on which investigations focus, how information is obtained and used in criminal investigations, types of scientific skills required to practice forensic science, guidance on training. Real cases discussed; demonstrations of methods provided.
ETX 030
Chemical & Drug Use & Abuse

Overview of chemical use and abuse in our society. Effects of chemicals (therapeutic drugs, pesticides, food additives, herbal remedies, environmental contaminants, and recreational drugs) on humans and other living systems.
ETX 190S
Environmental Toxicology Career Seminar

Careers in environmental toxicology; discussions with graduates from the Department of Environmental Toxicology and other experts in the field.
ETX 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates


ETX 290
Seminar

Current topics in environmental toxicology.
ETX 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum


EVE 002
Biodiversity

Introduction to nature, scope and geographical distribution of biodiversity (the diversity of life, with emphasis on plants and animals, especially insects).  Humans and biodiversity - domestication, aesthetics, ethics and valuation.  Species richness and "success."  Biodiversity through time; monitoring, evaluation and conservation.  Biomes - global, continental and Californian.
EVE 010
Evolution for Non-Biologists

Introduction to evolutionary biology for the general population.
EVE 012
Life in the Sea

Diversity of life in the sea; adaptations to physical/chemical ocean environment; marine science research methods; utilization of living marine resources by humans; factors and processes that influence diversity of sea life, including humans.
EVE 013
Sex in the Natural World

Explores the diversity, mechanisms and evolution of sexual behaviors across the kingdoms of life.
EVE 016
Wild Davis: A California Naturalist Certification Course

Natural history and urban ecology of Davis. Basics of ecological observation, community science and service, and California’s unique natural communities. If fee is paid, completion of the course provides certification in the UC California Naturalist Program. 
EVE 017
Dining with Darwin: Evolutionary Insights Into Your Diet

Crave salty, fatty, sugary foods? Want to know why? Evolution of cravings, metabolism and dentition, and of cooking our food. Relate Paleo, South Beach, and vegan diets to ancestral and global diets and current metabolism. For majors and nonmajors.  
EVE 020
Darwinian Medicine

Introduction for non-biologists to the evolved traits of humans and pathogens that influence human biological variation, health, and disease.
EVE 099
Special Study for Lower Division Students


EVE 198
Directed Group Study

Directed group study. May be taught abroad.
EVE 210
Molecular Phylogenetic Analysis

Theory and practice of inferring phylogenetic trees using molecular sequence data.  Practical techniques for obtaining sequence data, advantages and disadvantages of common approaches for inferring trees, statistical methods for comparing alternative hypotheses.
EVE 231
Principles of Biological Data Analysis

Introduction to the principles of data analysis, experimental design, statistical modeling, inference, and hypothesis tests. Statistical methods of particular importance in biological applications will be emphasized. Examples will be presented from the fields of ecology and evolutionary genetics.
EXB 010
Exercise and Fitness:  Principles and Practice

Human movement from physiological, psychological, sociological, and historical perspectives.  Biology and psychology of exercise across the human lifespan.  
EXB 010
Exercise and Fitness:  Principles and Practice

Human movement from physiological, psychological, sociological, and historical perspectives.  Biology and psychology of exercise across the human lifespan.  
EXB 120
Sport in American Society

Sociological approaches to the study of sport and contemporary American culture, including sport interaction with politics, economics, religion, gender, race, media and ethics. Socialization factors involving youth, scholastic, collegiate, and Olympic sport.
FAP 434
Primary Care Clinics-Clínica Tepati

Medical students will learn counseling, diagnosis and treatment of patients with chronic and acute disease under supervision of physician. Provides exposure to special health care needs of various ethnic and poverty-level populations.
FAP 435
Primary Care Clinics-Imani Clinic

Learn counseling, diagnosis and treatment of patients with chronic and acute disease under supervision of physician. Provides exposure to special health care needs of various ethnic and poverty-level populations.
FAP 436
Continuity Clinic in Primary Care; Shifa Clinic

Learn counseling, diagnosis and treatment of patients with chronic and acute disease under supervision of physician. Provides exposure to special health care needs of various ethnic and poverty-level populations.
FAP 437
Primary Care Clinics: Knights Landing

Learn counseling, diagnosis and treatment of patients with chronic and acute disease under supervision of physician. Provides exposure to special health care needs of various ethnic and poverty-level populations in the community of Knights Landing.
FAP 450
CAM in Family & Community Health

Complementary and alternative medicine courses at away institutions that cover various aspects of integrative medicine, including but not limited to: botanicals, homeopathy, mind/body, naturopathy, nutrition, traditional Chinese medicine, osteopathy, and energy medicine. Intended to grant units for away rotations; not offered at the UC Davis Medical Center.
FAP 495
LGBTIQQA Healthcare Lecture Series

Increase the awareness of medical issues surrounding the LGBTIQQA community and arm students with knowledge of the health disparities the community faces. Provide better quality care to the LGBTIQQA patients cared for as physicians.
FAP 498
Directed Group Study

Explore in-depth various topics in primary care. Extensive contact with and oversight by instructor.
FMS 001
Introduction to Film Studies

Analysis of film form and narrative, including cinematography, editing, and sound. Issues in film studies, including authorship, stardom, race, gender, class, and cultural identity. Includes introduction to selected cinematic movements and national film traditions.
FMS 045
Vampires & Other Horrors in Film & Media

History of representations of vampires and horror generally from the 19th-21st centuries. Emphasis on transnational history of the horror genre; psychologies of horror effects; issues of race, gender, and class; intersections with prejudice, medicine, modernity.
FMS 142
New German Cinema

German filmmakers of the 1960s-1980s such as Fassbinder, Herzog, Syberberg, Brückner, Schlöndorf, Kluge, Wenders.  Knowledge of German is not required.
FOR 200
Fundamental Concepts in Forensic Science

Overview of Forensic Science.   Problem definition, strategies for problem solving, analytical tools, and professional and ethical considerations.
FOR 207
Advanced Spectroscopy Methods in Forensic Science

Discuss, evaluate and interpret advanced molecular spectra/structure, Infrared Spectroscopy, such as chemical applications of spectroscopic methods, vibrational, rotational spectra; electronic spectra, photoelectron spectroscopy generated by various analytical instruments used in forensic science community.
FOR 208
Forensic Toxicology

Forensic toxicology as related to driving under the influence of drugs (DUID) investigations, detection, and evaluation through the use of standardized field sobriety tests and drug recognition protocols.  
FOR 210
Personal Identification Methods In Forensic Science

Methods for identifying individuals from evidence collected at crime scenes, suspects or victims, crime scene examination and analytical methods used to support such investigations. Topics include forensic anthropology and odontology; latent prints; shoe prints; facial reconstruction/recognition; eyewitness identifications; biometric systems.
FOR 212
Scientific Evidence & Courtroom Testimony

Explores the relationship between science and the criminal justice system. Admissibility of scientific testimony and documentary proof during the trial, concepts of relevancy, hearsay and opinion rule, examination of expert witnesses, impact of Kelley-Fry and Daubert decisions & court testimony.
FOR 215
Forensic Fire & Arson Investigation

Principles and techniques of scientific investigation of fires and related crimes; offer peer-reviewed protocols for processing fire and explosion scenes; discuss recognition, collection, analysis of physical evidence, and describe the scientific method for decision-making in fire/arson investigation.  
FOR 221L
Forensic Science Analytical Instrumentation

Methodology and instruments used for the analysis of substances of interest in the discipline of Forensic Science. Practical experience with modern instrumental techniques & methodologies used in the advanced forensic science laboratory. 
FOR 240
Homicide Crime Scene Investigation

Processing and evaluating complex homicide scenes. Functions and activities of police agencies. Recognition, documentation, identification, and collection of evidence. Event sequence reconstruction. Evidence collection, preservation, report writing. Courtroom presentation.
FOR 268
Statistics in Forensic Science

Statistics that are used by the forensic scientist, their limitations/applications in presenting evidential results in such areas as DNA-STR results, trace evidence correlation, fingerprint statistics, population sampling and the Bayes method. 
FOR 283
Forensic Biology

Overview to the foundational concepts in forensic biology: chemistry and molecular biology of biological evidence, genetic basis of biological uniqueness, evolutionary basis of species differences, patterns and dynamics of evidence deterioration, and the legal/ professional considerations associated with biological evidence.
FOR 289
Survey in Forensic Science

Analytical methods in contemporary forensic science. Clandestine laboratories in California, crime scene management, examination and analysis of human hair, forensic ballistics/trajectory reconstruction, shoe/tire print impressions, serial number restoration, forensic aspects of alcohol impairment, bloodstain pattern interpretation, microscopy of building materials, biological aspect of forensic science. 
FOR 290
Seminar in Forensic Science

Students will be exposed to topical areas in Forensic Science by presentations conducted by expert guest speakers.  The seminar will also serve as a medium whereby the exiting students will present the research conducted as part of their thesis requirement.
FOR 290C
Graduate Research Conference in Forensic Science

Individual and/or group conference on problems, progress and techniques in forensic science and research.  
FOR 293
Forensic Science Research Methodology

Introduction to identification, formulation, and solution of meaningful scientific problems encountered in the Forensic Science area including experimental design and/or theoretical analysis of new and prevailing techniques, theories and hypotheses. Students will present and defend their thesis research/journal article proposals. 
FOR 298
Group Study in Forensic Science


FRE 001
Elementary French

Introduction to French grammar and development of all language skills in a cultural context with special emphasis on communication.
FRE 050
French Film

Introduction to the tradition of French cinema from its invention by Méliès and the Lumière brothers through New Wave (especially the works of Truffaut and Godard) and more recent developments in French and Francophone film. Taught in English.
FRE 051
Major Works of French Literature in Translation

Readings in English translation of key works of French and Francophone literature from the Middle Ages to the Present.  Particular attention is given to the long-standing interest of French writers in issues of social, regional, gender, sexual, and ethnic identity.
FRE 052
France & the French-Speaking World

Taught in English. Survey of the history and culture of France and the French-speaking world, especially Canada, the Caribbean and Africa. Study of social, historical and cultural issues that occupy the French-speaking world, with particular attention to mass media.
FRE 053
French as a World Language

The linguistic status of French and its function in multilingual societies and international arenas. Linguistico-political landscape of communities in Euroasia, Africa, and the Americas. Sociolinguistic concepts and emergence of French as a world language.
FRE 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates


FSM 198
Directed Group Study


FSM 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates


FST 001
Principles of Food Science

Food science fundamentals. Fresh and processed food technologies; world food problems; food composition; food microbiological and toxicological safety; food laws; evaluation of acceptability and nutritional value. 
FST 003
Introduction to Brewing & Beer

Basic description of brewing and associated processes, from raw materials to final product; history of brewing and brewing science; types of beer worldwide; world beer markets; basics of beer quality, including wholesomeness; role of scientist in brewing.
FST 003V
Introduction to Brewing & Beer

Basic description of brewing and associated processes, from raw materials to final product; history of brewing and brewing science; types of beer worldwide; world beer markets; basics of beer quality, including wholesomeness; role of scientist in brewing.
FST 010
Food Science, Folklore & Health

Ancient and modern food folklore in relation to health and well-being. Food safety, organic food, herbalism, food preservation, and nutritional enhancement.
FST 055
Food in American Culture

Relationship between food and culture; relationship between food and the social order; influences on eating habits and the tensions between them including identity, convenience, and responsibility; multiple disciplines and genres.
FST 228
Sustainable Food Systems

Environmental impacts of food systems. Methods for quantifying resource use and managing waste for food production and processing. Influence of policies, technologies, and consumer demand on advancing sustainable food systems.
FST 290
Seminar


FST 298
Group Study


GAS 299
Research

Research in gastroenterology.
GDB 090
Introduction to Global Disease Biology

Introduction to the Global Disease Biology major, research and internship opportunities, and potential career paths in human, animal, and plant health. Communication, ethics and the nature of science.
GEL 001
The Earth

Introduction to the study of the Earth. Earth's physical and chemical structure; internal and surface processes that mold the Earth; geological hazards and resources. 
GEL 002
Earth System Science

Solid and fluid earth and its place in the solar system. How the solid earth interacts with the atmosphere, hydrosphere, biosphere, and extraterrestrial environment.  
GEL 004
Evolution: Science & World View

Introduction to biological evolution. Emphasis on historical development, major lines of evidence and causes of evolution; relationships between evolution and Earth history; the impact of evolutionary thought on other disciplines.
GEL 010
Modern & Ancient Global Environmental Change

Fundamental scientific concepts underlying issues such as global warming, pollution, and the future of nonsustainable resources presented in the context of anthropogenic processes as well as natural forcing of paleoenvironmental change throughout Earth's history.
GEL 012
Evolution & Paleobiology of Dinosaurs

Introduction to evolutionary biology, paleobiology, ecology and paleoecology, using dinosaurs as case studies.
GEL 016
The Oceans

Introductory survey of the marine environment. Oceanic physical phenomena, chemical constituents and chemistry of water, geological history, the seas biota and human utilization of marine resources
GEL 016V
The Oceans

Introductory survey of the marine environment. Oceanic physical phenomena, chemical constituents and chemistry of water, geological history, the seas biota and human utilization of marine resources. 
GEL 017
Earthquakes & Other Earth Hazards

Impact of earthquakes, tsunami, volcanoes, landslides, and floods on humans, structures, and the environment. Discussion of the causes and effects of disasters and catastrophes, and on prediction, preparation, and mitigation of natural hazards.
GEL 018
Energy & the Environment

Conventional and alternative energy resources and their environmental impacts. Basic principles, historical development, current advantages and disadvantages, future prospects. Oil, natural gas, coal, nuclear, wind, geothermal, water, tidal, solar, hydrogen, and other sources of energy for the 21st century.
GEL 018V
Energy & the Environment

Conventional and alternative energy resources and their environmental impacts. Basic principles, historical development, current advantages and disadvantages, future prospects. Oil, natural gas, coal, nuclear, wind, geothermal, water, tidal, solar, hydrogen, and other sources of energy for the 21st century.
GEL 020
Geology of California

The geologic history of California, the origin of rocks and the environments in which they were formed, the structure of the rocks and the interpretation of their structural history, mineral resources, and appreciation of the California landscape. Offered in alternate years.
GEL 025
Geology of National Parks

Appreciation of the geologic framework underlying the inherent beauty of U.S. National Parks. Relationship of individual parks to geologic processes such as mountain building, volcanism, stream erosion, glacial action and landscape evolution.
GEL 025V
Geology of National Parks

Appreciation of the geologic framework underlying the inherent beauty of U.S. National Parks. Relationship of individual parks to geologic processes such as mountain building, volcanism, stream erosion, glacial action and landscape evolution.
GEL 028
Astrobiology

Origin, evolution and distribution of life in our solar system and the Universe. Detecting habitable worlds, Drake equations, necessities and raw materials for life, philosophical implications of the search for life elsewhere.
GEL 032
Volcanoes

Role of eruptions, and eruptive products of volcanoes in shaping the planet's surface, influencing its environment, and providing essential human resources.
GEL 035
Rivers

Introduction to geomorphology, climate and geology of rivers and watersheds, with case examples from California.  Assessment of impacts of logging, agriculture, mining, urbanization and water supply on river processes.  Optional river field trips.
GEL 036
The Solar System

Nature of the sun, moon, and planets as determined by recent manned and unmanned exploration of the solar system. Comparison of terrestrial, lunar, and planetary geological processes. Search for life on other planets. Origin and evolution of the solar system. (Former course GEL 113 & GEL 113G.)
GEL 081
Learning in Science & Mathematics

Exploration of how students learn and develop understanding in science and mathematics classrooms. Introduction to case studies and interview techniques and their use in K-6 classrooms to illuminate factors that affect student learning. 
GEL 120
Origins: From the Big Bang to Today

Long-term and large-scale perspectives on the origins of the universe, stars and planets, life, human evolution, the rise of civilization and the modern world. Multi-disciplinary approach to "Big History" involving cosmology, astronomy, geology, climatology, biology, anthropology, archeology and traditional history.
GEL 131
Risk: Natural Hazards & Related Phenomena

Risk, prediction, prevention and response for earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, landslides, floods, storms, fires, impacts, global warming.
GEL 185A
Conceptual Integrated Science for Non-Science Majors: The Physical World

Conceptual, inquiry-based integrated science course. Topics in the Next Generation Science Standards. Elementary school level teaching practice. Physics, chemistry, and science inquiry.
GEL 185B
Conceptual Integrated Science for Non-Science Majors: Earth System Science

Conceptual, inquiry-based integrated science course. Topics in the Next Generation Science Standards. Elementary school level teaching practice. Earth, space and environmental science, and science inquiry.
GEL 186
Facilitating Learning in STEM Classrooms

STEM Learning Assistant Seminar. Theoretical and practical issues of effective teaching in discussion/labs: student-centered, active, cooperative learning environments, responsive teaching, and differentiated classroom instruction.
GEL 190
Seminar in Geology 

Presentation and discussion of current topics in geology by visiting lecturers, staff, and students. Written abstracts. 
GEL 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates

Special study for advanced undergraduates.
GEL 262
Paleobiology Graduate Seminar: Methodological Aspects

One or more major methods used in the study of fossils: Morphometrics and three-dimensional reconstruction of fossils, phylogenetic methodology, the application of geochemical techniques, and electron microscopy.
GEL 290
Seminar in Geology

Presentation and discussion of current topics in geology by visiting lecturers, staff, and students.
GEL 298
Group Study

Group study.
GEL 299
Research

Research.
GEL 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum

Teaching assistant training.
GEO 200A
Research Trends in Geography

Major current research themes and trends in geography.
GEO 200CN
Quantitative Geography

Provides an overview of quantitative approaches in spatial data analysis. Overview of different approaches used for inference, modeling, and prediction. Also learn how to write computer programs to implement these methods.
GEO 200DN
Socio-Spatial Analysis in Geography

Introduction to methodologies of socio-spatial analysis in interviews, and ethnographic fieldwork. Students develop a critical understanding of different methodological and theoretical approaches, and their appropriate applications in overall research design.
GEO 215
Ecologies of Infrastructure

Focus on design practices and theory associated with ecological conceptions of infrastructure, including networked infrastructure, region, bioregion, regionalization, ecological engineering, reconciliation ecology, novel ecosystems, and theory/articulation of landscape change. 
GEO 233
Urban Planning & Design  

Regulation, design, and development of the built landscape, planning and land development processes, zoning and subdivision regulation, site planning, urban design goals and methods, public participation strategies, creatively designing landscapes to meet community and ecological goals.
GEO 236
Transportation Planning & Policy

Transportation planning process at the regional level, including the role of federal policy in shaping regional transportation planning, tools and techniques used in regional transportation planning, issues facing regional transportation planning agencies, pros and cons of potential solutions and strategies.
GEO 240
Community Development Theory

Introduction to theories of community development and different concepts of community, poverty, and development. Emphasis on building theory, linking applied development techniques to theory, evaluating development policy, and examining case studies of community development organizations and projects.
GEO 260
Global Political Ecology

Background, genesis, current debates in political ecology. Examination of political-economic and social-cultural causes of environmental change. Introduction to development theory, globalization, history of science and power/knowledge. Cases of social movements, justice, resistance, gender, race and class. Focus outside North America.
GEO 279
Exploring Data from Built Environment Using R

Introduction to modern data science, specifically data acquisition, exploratory data, visualization, and beginning data analysis using R. Emphasizes computational reasoning and working with tabular and non-standard data. Focus will be on data generated in the built environment.
GEO 291
Seminar in Cultural Geography


GEO 295
Seminar in Urban Geography


GEO 299
Research


GER 001
Elementary German

Introduction to German grammar and development of all language skills in a cultural context with special emphasis on communication.  
GER 001A
Accelerated Intensive Elementary German

Special 12-week accelerated, intensive summer session course that combines the work of GER 001, GER 002, and GER 003.  Introduction to German grammar and development of all language skills in a cultural context with emphasis on communication.
GER 010
German Fairy Tales from the Grimms to Disney

Introduction to the genre of fairy tale with a focus on the Brothers Grimm and Hans Christian Andersen in their respective political/cultural contexts. Discusses filmic adaptations by Disney, the East German DEFA and Hollywood.
GER 011
Travel & the Modern World

Examination of travel as an essential human activity and experience of global modernity and cross-cultural encounters from the 18th to the 21st century with an emphasis on German-speaking culture. Travelogues, literature, art, memoirs, and films in English translation. 
GER 040
Great German Short Stories (in English)

Major German short stories from Goethe at the end of the 18th century to Thomas Mann at the beginning of the 20th century.
GER 045
Vampires & Other Horrors in Film & Media

History of representations of vampires and horror generally from the 19th-21st centuries. Emphasis on transnational history of the horror genre; psychologies of horror effects; issues of race, gender, and class; intersections with prejudice, medicine, modernity.
GER 048
Myth & Saga in the Germanic Cultures

Knowledge of German not required. English translation from the Norse Eddas, the Volsung and Sigurd-Siegfried cycles, and the Gudrun lays; literary mythology in German Romanticism culminating in Wagner's "total art-work" concept and The Ring of the Nibelung cycle. May not be counted toward major in German.
GER 099
Special Study for Undergraduates


GER 113
Goethe's Faust

Knowledge of German not required. Intensive study of Goethe's Faust in its entirety. Discussions and readings in English; reading the text in the original is encouraged. 
GER 115
German Literature Since 1945

Knowledge of German not required. Major writers of the post-wargeneration of Austria, Switzerland and Germany: novelists, such as Böll, Grass, Johnson, Walser, Handke; playwrights such as Frisch, Dürrentmatt and Hochhuth; and poets, such as Celan, Enzensberger, and Aichinger. 
GER 117
After the Catastrophe: Jews & Jewish Life in Post-1945 Germany

Jews and Jewish life in post-1945 Germany, with special attention given to literature, historical debates, photography, film, as well as websites and other new media.
GER 118A
Vienna at the Turn of the 20th Century (The End of the Habsburg Empire)

Knowledge of German not required. Cultural ferment in Vienna, capital of the multinational Habsburg empire, at the turn of the century, with consideration of innovations in literature, music, graphic arts, architecture philosophy and psychology, heralding European modernism.  
GER 118B
Weimar Culture: Defeat, the Roaring Twenties, the Rise of Nazism

Knowledge of German not required.  Expressionism in graphic arts, literature, film, New Objectivity, Brecht, and Bauhaus considered in the context of the failure of the German experiment in democracy, the Weimar Republic of 1919-33.
GER 119
From German Fiction to German Film

Examines a number of film adaptations of major German prose works and plays to ascertain the types of changes involved in the shift in medium and the positive and negative effects achieved by such transferences.
GER 141
The Holocaust & its Literary Representation 

Knowledge of German not required. Aesthetic representation and metaphorical transformation of the Holocaust in its human and historical perspectives.
GER 142
New German Cinema

Knowledge of German not required.  German filmmakers of the 1960s-1980s such as Fassbinder, Herzog, Syberberg, Brückner, Schlöndorf, Kluge, Wenders.
GER 144
Marx, Nietzsche, Freud

Study of major texts of Marx, Nietzsche, and Freud, selected with an eye to their impact on 20th-century economics, ethics, and attitudes toward eros. Particular focus on conceptions of the self and the individual's relation to society.
GER 165E
Nazi & Fascist Cinema: Film & other Visual Media

Analysis of nefarious and noxious cultural products in history: films made under the Nazis and other fascists, 1933-1945. Questions at heart of humanistic studies: relationship of culture to propaganda, politics, and even unfathomable crime.
GER 198
Directed Group Study


GER 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates


GER 202
Middle High German

Outline of grammar; selections from Middle High German epic, romance, and lyric poetry.
GER 210
Techniques of Literary Scholarship

Bibliographical, organizational, and methodological tools and resources for advanced, independent research.
GER 211
Concepts in Literary Theory

Advanced course in concepts of literary theory and criticism. Discussion of the emergence of theoretical concepts and their impact on the understanding and appreciation of literary works. Discussion in German and English, readings in German.
GER 212
Contemporary Approaches to Literary Theory

Study of contemporary theoretical approaches such as structuralism,deconstruction, feminism, Marxism/Frankfurt School, and reception theory in conjunction with the works of major authors.
GER 239
Narrative & Narrative Theory

Studies, in a theoretical and literary historical context, major elements of 19th- and 20th-century narrative, such as techniques of framing, refraction, and montage; narrative perspective; mimesis; and self-consciousness. Focuses on paradigmatic prose texts alongside a spectrum of critical approaches.
GER 240
Forms of German Verse

Development of German verse from the Middle Ages to the present, with special emphasis on different techniques of text analysis and interpretation.
GER 241
The German Drama

Major forms of German drama from its origins to the middle of the 20th century.
GER 242
The German Novelle

The major German Novellisten, with particular emphasis on the flowering of this genre in the 19th century. 
GER 243
Fontane & the Rise of the Modern German Novel

Fontane, the father of the modern German novel and the chief German representative of the European novel at its greatest, in the context of the 19-century European political and social scene.
GER 244
Gender & Comedy

Studies of genre and gender in German-language comedy by male and female writers from the 18th century to the present. Authors treated include Lessing, Kleist, Büchner, Ebner-Eschenbach, Hauptmann, Hofmannsthal, Frisch, Langner, and Jelinek.
GER 252
The Writing of Lessing

Study of Lessing's theory of literature with particular emphasis upon his critical attacks on French drama.
GER 253
Goethe

Study of the origins of Goethe's thought in German Pietism, and his principal artistic, autobiographical, scientific, and philosophical works.
GER 254
Schiller

Critical analysis of Schiller's major works and his impact on the intellectual climate in Germany during the late-18th and early-19th centuries.
GER 257
Heinrich von Kleist

Kleist's important dramatic and prose works; special attention will begiven to the peculiar hermeneutic problems in modern German, French, and Anglo-American Kleist criticism.
GER 258
The Novels of Thomas Mann

Reading of selected novels with emphasis on aesthetic techniques, originality, ethical and political views, and influence on the contemporary literary scene in Germany.
GER 259
Studies in Kafka

Study of Kafkas narrative techniques with special emphasis in the shorter works on the existential development from its roots in Expressionism.
GER 260
The Poetry of Rilke

Study of the principal motifs, myths, images, and problems in the poetry of Rainer Maria Rilke.
GER 261
Brecht & the Epic Theater

Reading of Brechts works with emphasis on the ideas which impelled the development of new literary forms and concepts.
GER 262
Studies in Turn-of-the-Century Culture

Investigates literary currents in turn-of-the-century Germany and Austria against the background of contemporaneous developments in psychology, the visual arts, philosophy, and music. Authors treated include Hauptmann, Holz and Schlaf, Schnitzler, T. Mann, Wedekind, Musil, Hofmannsthal.
GER 288
Renaissance & Reformation in German Literature

Parabolic and didactic style in Germany's literature during the 16th century.
GER 289
German Literature of the Baroque

The "Elegantiaideal" and the varying methods used to portray it in 17th-century German literature.
GER 290
The Enlightenment in German Literature

Revolt against the concept of the Elegantiaideal, and evolution of a new literature based on reason and wit.
GER 291
Foreign Language Learning in the Classroom

Overview of approaches to university-level foreign language instruction and the theoretical notions underlying current trends in classroom practices across commonly taught foreign languages.
GER 292
Sentimentality & Sturm und Drang in German Literature

Reaction to overemphasis on Reason: theories of Hamann and Herder and works of poets such as Lenz, Leisewitz, the early Goethe and Schiller.
GER 293
The Classical Age of German Literature

Inquiry into the aesthetic and humanistic qualities of Germany's greatest literary epoch.
GER 294
The Romantic Period in German Literature

Survey of the works of early 19th-century authors in reaction against the age of classicism.
GER 295
Poetic Realism in German Literature

Outstanding figures in German literature between 1840 and 1890. Important phases in their developments will be treated.
GER 296
20th-Century German Literature

Considers the revolt of the Hauptmann generation, Symbolism, Expressionism, and the chief currents of the contemporary scene.
GER 297
Special Topics in German Literature

Various special topics in German literature, which may cut across the more usual period and genre rubrics.
GER 298
Group Study


GER 299
Individual Study


GER 299D
Special Study for the Doctoral Dissertation


GGG 225
Gene & Cellular Therapies

Gene therapy from basic concepts to clinical applications. Topics include the human genome and genetic variation, genetic diseases, methods to manipulate gene expression, viral and non-viral delivery vectors, history and progress of gene therapy, case studies, and ethical issues.
GGG 290
Seminar in Evolutionary, Developmental & Population Genetics

Topics of current interest in evolutionary, population, and developmental genetics.
GGG 290A
Graduate Student Conference in Genetics

Student-given seminars on topics in genetics, with critiques by instructor and peers.
GGG 292
Seminar in Genomics & Epigenomics

Topics of current interest in genomics and epigenomics.
GGG 299
Research


GMD 291
Seminars in Human Health Services Research & Clinical Epidemiology

Critical review, evaluation, and discussion of research in health services and clinical epidemiology. Presentation of statistical, epidemiologic, and econometric methods. Students present their own research and critique the work of others.
GRK 001
Elementary Greek

Introduction to the basic grammar and vocabulary of Classical and New Testament Greek. Development of translation skills with emphasis on Greek-English. 
HDE 012
Human Sexuality

Vocabulary, structure/function of reproductive system; sexual response; pre-natal development; pregnancy and childbirth; development of sexuality; rape and sexual assault; birth control; sexually transmitted diseases; homosexuality; establishing/maintaining intimacy; sexual dysfunctions; communication; enhancing sexual interaction, cultural differences in attitudes towards sexuality.
HDE 099
Special Study for Undergraduates


HDE 198
Directed Group Study


HDE 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates


HDE 200C
Development in Adulthood

Theory and research focusing on social, personality, cognitive, and biological development from early to late adulthood. Emphasis is on theory development and continuity and change.
HDE 240
Peer Relationships during Adolescence

Examines the role of peer relationships in adolescent development including forms and functions at the individual, dyadic and group levels. Ethnicity and cross cultural research will be discussed. Emphasis on methodology, including surveys, peer nominations/sociometrics, experimental, and observational designs.
HDE 250
Current Research on Family Relationships


HDE 252
Family Research, Programs & Policy

Examines the competing interests of research, policy, and service on current issues of family functioning and individual well being. Considers communication barriers between researchers, practitioners, and policy makers.
HDE 290
Seminar

Discussion and evaluation of theories, research, and issues in human development. Different topics each quarter.
HDE 298
Group Study 


HDE 299
Human Development


HEB 001
Elementary Hebrew

Speaking, listening, comprehension, reading and writing fundamentals of modern Hebrew. 
HEB 001
Elementary Hebrew

Speaking, listening, comprehension, reading and writing fundamentals of modern Hebrew. 
HEB 001A
Accelerated Intensive Elementary Hebrew

Special 12-week accelerated, intensive summer session course that combines the work of HEB 001, HEB 002, and HEB 003. Introduction to Hebrew grammar and development of language skills in a cultural context with emphasis on communication.
HEB 010
Introduction to Biblical Hebrew

Introduction to the Hebrew Alphabet and basic grammar rules of the biblical language. Students will learn to read most any biblical text and learn how to find the meaning of words by their roots and morphological structure.
HIN 001
Elementary Hindi/Urdu I

Introduction to Devanagari Script through development of all language skills in a cultural context with emphasis on communicative proficiency.
HIN 001A
Accelerated Intensive Elementary Hindi

Special 12-week accelerated, intensive summer session course that combines the work of HIN 001, HIN 002, and HIN 003. Introduction to Devnagari Script through development of all language skills in cultural context with emphasis on communicative proficiency.
HIS 001
Introduction to History

Introduction to history, its key methodologies, writing tasks, and research practices. Examination of the development of history as an academic discipline; ethics in historical research. Topical focus changes regularly.
HIS 002
Introduction to the History of Science & Technology

Introduction to topics and methods of the history of science and technology. Emphasis on understanding the role of science and technology in the modern world through a long-term historical perspective. 
HIS 003
Cities: A Survey of World Cultures 

Survey of urban world cultures, focusing on up to ten cities selected by the instructor.
HIS 004A
History of Western Civilization

Growth of western civilization from late antiquity to the Renaissance.
HIS 004B
History of Western Civilization

History of western civilization from the Renaissance to the 18th century.
HIS 004C
History of Western Civilization

Development of Western Civilization from the 18th century to the present.
HIS 005
Modernist Culture

Modernist culture in global perspective. Introduction to early 20th-century innovations in visual arts, music, literature, film, and architecture in Europe, the Americas, Asia, and Africa.
HIS 006
Introduction to the Middle East

Survey of the major social, economic, political and cultural transformations in the Middle East from the rise of Islam (c.600A.D.) to the present, emphasizing themes in religion and culture, politics and society.
HIS 007A
History of Latin America to 1700

Introduction to the history of Spanish and Portuguese America from the late pre-Columbian period through the initial phase and consolidation of a colonial regime (circa 1700).  Topics include conquest, colonialism, racial mixture, gender, and labor systems.
HIS 007B
History of Latin America, 1700-1900

Latin America from colony to republic. The nature of Iberian colonialism, the causes for independence, the creation of nation states, the difficulties in consolidating these nations, and the rise of Liberalism and export economies in the 19th century.  
HIS 007C
History of Latin America 1900-present

Latin America since the beginning of the 20th century. Themes include export economies, oligarchic rule, crises of depression and war, corporatism, populism, revolution and reform movements, cultural and ethnic issues, U.S.-Latin American relations, neo-liberal restructuring. 
HIS 008
History of Indian Civilization

Survey of Indian civilization from the rise of cities (ca. 2000 B.C.) to the present, emphasizing themes in religion, social and political organization, and art and literature that reflect cultural interactionand change.
HIS 009A
History of East Asian Civilization

Surveys traditional Chinese civilization and its modern transformation.Emphasis is on thought and religion, political and social life, art and literature. Perspectives on contemporary China are provided.
HIS 009B
History of East Asian Civilization

Surveys traditional Japanese civilization and its modern transformation.Emphasis is on thought and religion, political and social life, art and literature. Perspectives on contemporary Japan are provided.
HIS 009C
Korean Culture & Society: From Ancient Three Kingdoms to the Global K-Pop

Evolution of Korean society from Three Kingdoms period (B.C.E 57 to C.E. 676) to the contemporary era emphasizing the perseverance and transformations of traditional social and cultural patterns.
HIS 010A
World History to 1350

Historical examination of the changing relationship of human societies to one another and to their natural settings through the year 1350, with particular attention to long-term trends and to periodic crises that reshaped the links of culture and nature on a global scale. 
HIS 010B
World History, c. 1350-1850

Major topics in world history from the 14th century to the beginning of the 19th century. Topics will vary but may include: oceans as systems of human communication and conflict; the global consequences of "industrious revolutions" in Europe and Asia, etc.
HIS 010C
World History III

Major topics from world history of the 19th and 20th centuries, emphasizing the rise and fall of Western colonial empires; Cold War and the superpowers; the spread of the nation-states; and process of globalization.
HIS 011
History of the Jewish People in the Modern World

Histories and cultures of the Jews since 1492. Topics include: the making of Jewish diasporas, roots of antisemitism, the Holocaust in images and texts, changing ideas of the self, Jews in America,  contemporary visions of the Jewish past.
HIS 012
Food & History

Survey of the ways humans have fed themselves from the dawn of humanity to the present. Transformation of plants and animals into food, cooking into cuisine, and ceremony into etiquette.
HIS 013
Global Sexualities

Global history of sexualities, including comparative study of gender, marriage, and fertility before 1800, followed by the modern history of sexualities worldwide as it intersects with imperialism, race, population control, law, and globalization.
HIS 014
History of Global Capitalism

History of institutions, workers, commodity chains, and the social and cultural context of capitalism around the world from 1500-present. Emphasis on transnational and comparative histories of political economies and individual human lives.  
HIS 015A
Africa to 1900

Introduction to African history to 1900. Origins and impact of early human history, precolonial states and societies, slavery and the slave trade, religious and cultural movements, and the foundations of European colonialism.
HIS 015B
Africa Today

Survey of major themes in colonial and postcolonial sub-Saharan African history, including colonialism, decolonization, nationalism and politics, economic history and labor, urbanization, popular culture, gender, marriage, and family life.
HIS 016
Sex, Science, & Society

Survey of the relationship between sex, science, and society in the history of the modern world. Emphasis on the development of scientific ideas about the human body against broader social, cultural, and political trends and from a global viewpoint. 
HIS 017A
History of the United States

The experience of the American people from the Colonial Era to the Civil War.
HIS 017B
History of the United States

The experience of the American people from the Civil War to the end of the Cold War.
HIS 018A
Race in America to 1865 

Introduction to history of race and racial formation in the United States to the Civil War through a comparative approach. Examines the experiences of African Americans, Asian Americans, Native American, Mexican Americans and other Latino/a groups. 
HIS 018B
Race in the United States Since 1865

Introduction to the history of race and racial formation in America since 1865 though a comparative approach that examines the experiences of African Americans, Asian Americans, Native American and Mexican Americans and other Latino/a groups. 
HIS 019
Migration & Borders in Global History

Introduction to global migration history from 1800 to the present; labor migration systems; border governance; undocumented migrants; partition, displacement, and refugee regimes; race, class, and gender in migration law.
HIS 020
The Vietnam War

A history of the Vietnam War, including its origins, fighting, and repercussions.
HIS 072A
Women & Gender in America, to 1865

History of women and gender in America through 1865, emphasizing intersections of gender, race, class, and sexuality.  Topics include interracial marriage, slavery, witchcraft, meanings of motherhood, war, domestic labor, moral reform, women’s rights, migrations, the effects of commercialization and industrialization.
HIS 072B
Women & Gender in America, 1865-Present

History of women and gender in America since 1865, emphasizing intersections of gender, race, class, and sexuality.  Covers emancipation, migration, immigration, war, media, same-sex and opposite-sex relationships, and the birth control, suffrage, labor, civil rights, feminist, and anti-feminist movements.
HIS 080
The History of the United States in the Middle East

History of the United States in the Middle East from 1900 to the present. Examination of U.S. foreign relations toward the Middle East, their regional ramifications and domestic repercussions.
HIS 080W
The History of the United States in the Middle East

History of the United States in the Middle East from 1900 to the present. Examination of U.S. foreign relations toward the Middle East, their regional ramifications and domestic repercussions with extensive writing.
HIS 085
Nature, Man, & the Machine in America

History of the attitudes and behavior of Americans toward their natural environment and their technology, from colonial times to the present. No final examination.
HIS 090
Research in History

Designed primarily for history majors. Intensive reading, discussion, research, and writing in selected topics in the various fields of history. Emphasis on primary sources and archival research. 
HIS 099
Special Study for Undergraduates


HIS 100
Selected Topics in History

Selected Topics in History may be organized around a particular geography (e.g., the Balkans), a chronological framework (e.g., the 1960s around the world) or a thematic approach (e.g., the rise of ethnic or racial identities in a particular region).  
HIS 101
Introduction to Historical Thought & Writing

Study of the history of historical thought and writing, analysis of critical and speculative philosophies of history and evaluation of modes of organization, interpretation, and style in historical writing.
HIS 102A
Undergraduate Proseminar in History: Ancient

Designed primarily for history majors. Intensive reading, discussion, research, and writing in selected topics in the various fields of history. Ancient.
HIS 102B
Undergraduate Proseminar in History: Medieval

Designed primarily for history majors. Intensive reading, discussion, research, and writing in selected topics in the various fields of history. Medieval. 
HIS 102D
Undergraduate Proseminar in History: Modern Europe to 1815

Designed primarily for history majors. Intensive reading, discussion, research, and writing in selected topics in the various fields of history. Modern Europe to 1815. 
HIS 102E
Undergraduate Proseminar in History: Europe Since 1815

Designed primarily for history majors. Intensive reading, discussion, research, and writing in selected topics in the various fields of history. Europe since 1815.
HIS 102F
Undergraduate Proseminar in History: Russia

Designed primarily for history majors. Intensive reading, discussion, research, and writing in selected topics in the various fields of history. Russia.
HIS 102G
Undergraduate Proseminar in History: China to 1800

Designed primarily for history majors. Intensive reading, discussion, research, and writing in selected topics in the various fields of history. China to 1800.
HIS 102H
Undergraduate Proseminar in History: China Since 1800

Designed primarily for history majors. Intensive reading, discussion, research, and writing in selected topics in the various fields of history. China since 1800.
HIS 102I
Undergraduate Proseminar in History: Britain

Designed primarily for history majors. Intensive reading, discussion, research, and writing in selected topics in the various fields of history. Britain.
HIS 102J
Undergraduate Proseminar in History: Latin America Since 1810

Designed primarily for history majors. Intensive reading, discussion, research, and writing in selected topics in the various fields of history. Latin America since 1810.
HIS 102K
Undergraduate Proseminar in History: American History to 1787

Designed primarily for history majors. Intensive reading, discussion, research, and writing in selected topics in the various fields of history. American History to 1787. 
HIS 102L
Undergraduate Proseminar in History: United States, 1787-1896

Designed primarily for history majors. Intensive reading, discussion, research, and writing in selected topics in the various fields of history. United States, 1787-1896.
HIS 102M
Undergraduate Proseminar in History: United States Since 1896

Designed primarily for history majors. Intensive reading, discussion, research, and writing in selected topics in the various fields of history. United States since 1896.
HIS 102N
Undergraduate Proseminar in History: Japan

Designed primarily for history majors. Intensive reading, discussion, research, and writing in selected topics in the various fields of history. Japan.
HIS 102O
Undergraduate Proseminar in History: Africa

Designed primarily for history majors. Intensive reading, discussion, research, and writing in selected topics in the various fields of history. Africa.
HIS 102P
Undergraduate Proseminar in History: Christianity & Culture in Europe, 50-1850

Designed primarily for history majors. Intensive reading, discussion, research, and writing in selected topics in the various fields of history. Christianity and Culture in Europe, 50-1850.
HIS 102Q
Undergraduate Proseminar in History: India

Designed primarily for history majors. Intensive reading, discussion, research, and writing in selected topics in the various fields of history. India.
HIS 102R
Undergraduate Proseminar in History: Muslim Societies

Designed primarily for history majors. Intensive reading, discussion, research, and writing in selected topics in the various fields of history. Muslim Societies.
HIS 102S
Undergraduate Proseminar in History: Education Abroad Program

Designed primarily for history majors. Intensive reading, discussion, research, and writing in selected topics in the various fields of history. Education Abroad Program; may be taught abroad.
HIS 102X
Undergraduate Proseminar in History: Comparative History

Designed primarily for history majors. Intensive reading, discussion, research, and writing in selected topics in the various fields of history. Comparative History, selected topics in cultural, political, economic, and social history that deal comparatively with more than one geographic field. 
HIS 105
Teaching History

Teaching of American and world history at the K-12 level.  Emphasis on introducing college students to the multiple ways in which history is taught, and on understanding how history education is determined.  
HIS 107
Medicine's Histories: Human & Veterinary Medicine from the Ancient World to One Health 

Global, comparative study of the related histories of human and veterinary medicine from the ancient world to today's interdisciplinary One Health. Emphasis on reintegration of human and veterinary medicine to meet the biggest health challenges today.
HIS 108
Global Environmental History

Global, comparative  study of how environmental change, human perceptions of nature, and manipulations of nature have changed over time. Primary focus post-1500, emphasis on critically analyzing many common ideas of environmental change. 
HIS 109
Environmental Change, Disease & Public Health

Analysis of environmental changes from pre-history to the present and their influence on disease distribution, virulence and public health. Focus on critical study of many human-driven environmental changes and the accelerated transformation/spread of pathogens under globalization.
HIS 110A
Colonialism & the Making of the Modern World

History of the modern world, focusing on struggles between Europeans and colonized peoples; the global formation of capitalism; the creation of nation-states; and the constitution of bourgeois bodies and racial selves in modern societies.
HIS 111A
Ancient History

History of ancient empires of the Near East and of their historical legacy to the Western world.
HIS 111B
Ancient History

Political, cultural and intellectual study of the Greek world from Minoan-Mycenaean period to end of Hellenistic Age.
HIS 111C
Ancient History

Development of Rome from earliest times. Rise and fall of the Roman Republic; the Empire to 476 A.D.
HIS 112A
Topics in Pre-Modern Jewish History 

Topics in the history of Jews from the Biblical era to the eras of Jewish emancipation. Topics can be framed chronologically (eg.,medieval Jewry) or thematically (eg., trade and Jewish communities). May be repeated once for credit.
HIS 112B
Topics in Modern Jewish History

Topics in the history of Jews from the era of Jewish emancipation to thepresent. Topics can be framed chronologically or thematically (eg. Zionism, assimilation, the post Holocaust Diaspora). May be repeated once for credit.
HIS 112C
History of Jews in the Muslim World

History of Jewish communities in the lands of Islam from the time of the Prophet Muhammad to the present day.
HIS 113
History of Modern Israel

Topics include the rise and fall of utopian Zionism, the century-long struggle between Jews and Arabs, the development of modern Hebrew culture, the conflict between religious and secular Jews, and the nature of Israel's multicultural society.
HIS 115E
Slavery, Africa, & the Atlantic World

History of the African Slave trades, from the early Egyptian and Saharan trades in the pre-modern period to the trans-Atlantic trade (15th-19th century) and the contemporary trafficking of humans.
HIS 115F
History of Modern North Africa, 1800 to the Present

History of Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia and Libya (the Maghrib), 1800 to the present. Topics include conquest and pacification, reform movements, the rise of nationalism, decolonization, state capitalism, economic liberalization, Islamism, democratization and human rights, the interplay of history and memory.
HIS 119
World War I

The First World War and the settlement that followed from 1914-1919. Causes, conduct, and consequences of the war including military, political, economic, social, and cultural factors, with special emphasis on connections between the home front and the battlefield.
HIS 120
World War II

The Second World War from 1931 to 1945 in all of its theaters. Causes, conduct, and consequences of the war including military, political, economic, social, and cultural factors, with special emphasis on battlefield strategy and mobilization of the home front.
HIS 121A
Medieval History

European history from "the fall of the Roman Empire" to the 8th century.
HIS 121B
Medieval History

European history from Charlemagne to the 12th century.
HIS 121C
Medieval History

European history from the Crusades to the Renaissance.
HIS 122
Selected Themes in Medieval History

Each offering will focus on single major theme, such as medievalagrarian history, feudalism, the family, medieval Italy, or the Crusades. Readings include original sources in English translation and modern works. May be repeated for credit.
HIS 125
Topics in Early Modern European History

Social and cultural history, 1300-1800. Topics such as medieval andRenaissance Italy, early modern Italy, Ancient Regime France, family and sexuality, and material culture and daily life. May be repeated for credit.
HIS 126Y
The History of Human Rights in Europe

History of the origins, development, and state of international humanitarian law (IHL) and international human rights law (IHRL) in Europe. Emphasis on Enlightenment-era and modern theories of the source, utility, and limits of human rights. 
HIS 130A
Christianity & Culture in Europe: 50-1450

History of the ideas and institutions of Christianity and their impact on the late Roman Empire and medieval Europe in terms of outlook on life, art, politics and economics.
HIS 130B
Christianity & Culture in Europe: 1450-1600

History of the Lutheran, Zwinglian-Calvinist, Radical, Anglican, and Catholic Reformations as foundation stones of a new culture in Europe, with special attention to the interconnections between the revival of antiquity and the different reform movements.
HIS 130C
Christianity & Culture in Europe: 1600-1850

Survey of the intellectual, cultural and political reorientation of European society in the aftermath of the Wars of Religion. "Secularization" will be discussed in the context of the Enlightenment and Romanticism.
HIS 131A
Early Modern European History

Western European history from about 1350 to about 1500.
HIS 131B
European History During the Renaissance & Reformation

Survey of European society, politics, and culture from the late 15th through the early 17th centuries, with particular focus on the Italian and Northern Renaissance, on the Protestant Reformation, and the Catholic Counter Reformation.
HIS 131C
The Old Regime: Absolution, Enlightenment & Revolution in Europe

Survey of European society, politics, and culture in the 17th and 18th centuries, focusing on religious warfare, absolutism, Scientific Revolution, Enlightenment and the growth of religious tolerance, the French Revolution and the collapse of the old regime.
HIS 132
Crime & Punishment in Early Modern Europe

Deviance and crime in early modern Europe, contrasting imaginary crimes, e.g. witchcraft, with "real" crimes such as highway robbery and infanticide. Examines impact of gender, sexual orientation, ethnicity, and class in processes of criminalization.
HIS 133
European Thought and Culture from the Renaissance to the Enlightenment

History of European thought on politics, society, science, and religion from 1400 to 1800. Cultural impact of printing press, Protestant Reformation, wars, exploration, and empire. 
HIS 133
European Thought & Culture from the Renaissance to the Enlightenment

History of European thought on politics, society, science, and religion from 1400 to 1800. Cultural impact of printing press, Protestant Reformation, wars, exploration, and empire. 
HIS 134A
The Age of Revolution

Ideas and institutions during the French Revolution and the Napoleonicera.
HIS 135A
History of Science to the 18th Century

Survey of the historical development of science, technology, and medicine from the ancient world to the 18th century, with special emphasis on Isaac Newton as the culmination of the 17th-century scientific revolution.
HIS 135B
History of Science, 18th to 20th Centuries

Survey of the historical development of scientific thought in geology, biology, chemistry, physics, and cosmology from the 18th to the 20th century, with special emphasis on emergence of broad explanatory principles that serve more than one science.
HIS 136
Scientific Revolution

The rise of modern science in Europe, 1500–1750. The transformation of ideas about nature, knowledge, medicine, and technology in the age of Copernicus, Vesalius, Galileo, Descartes, and Newton.
HIS 138A
The Rise of the Russian Empire, 1304-1825

Expansion of the Russian state in Muscovite and imperial era. Emphasis on autocratic rule, the incorporation of non-Russian peoples, and emergence of Russia as a Great Power.
HIS 138B
Reform & Revolution in Tsarist Russia, 1825-1917

Processes of state reform and social change in the 19th century; failure of reform and collapse of the Russian Empire; the revolutions of 1917.
HIS 138C
Russian History: The Rise & Fall of the Soviet Union, 1917 to Present

Emergence of the Soviet Union as a socialist system and a Great Power; the decline and collapse of the Soviet Union and the formation of independent nation states in its place.
HIS 139A
Medieval & Renaissance Medicine

History of medicine, circa 1000-1700. Revival of ancient medicine; role of the universities; development of anatomy, chemistry and natural history; ideas about the body; cultural understanding of disease; hospital and the public health system.
HIS 139B
Medicine, Society, & Culture in Modern Europe

History of European medicine, 18th to 20th centuries, by examining the development of medical knowledge in epidemiology and anatomy; function of this knowledge, how it changed with technological breakthroughs and professionalization;and role of medicine in attitudes toward poverty, women, race, disease.
HIS 140
The Rise of Capitalism in Europe

Comparative analysis of major interpretations of the rise of merchant capitalism during the Middle Ages and Renaissance; European expansionoverseas, 1450-1815; the transition to modern capitalism via industrial revolution. Interplay of social, political, cultural, and economic history.
HIS 141
France Since 1815

France since 1815.
HIS 142A
History of the Holocaust

Topics include comparative genocide, medieval and modern antisemitism, modern German history, the rise of Nazism, Jewish life in Europe before the Nazi period, and the fate of the Jewish communities and other persecuted groups in Europe from 1933-1945.
HIS 142B
The Memory of the Holocaust

Examination of the literary, philosophical, theological and artistic responses to the Holocaust of the European Jews. Exploration of how memory is constructed, by whom and for what purposes.
HIS 143
History of Eastern Europe & the Balkans

History of the Baltic, Danubian, and Balkan lands since the Middle Ages. National cultures and conflicts in the Polish Commonwealth and the Habsburg and Ottoman Empires; nationalist movements, 1789-1914; the 20th century, including an analysis of the contemporary scene.
HIS 144A
History of Germany, 1450 to 1789

Survey of early modern Germany, 1450 to 1789, covering the theologyand social history of the Reformation, the Peasants War of 1525, religious warfare, state building and absolutism, the rise of Prussia, Austro-Prussian dualism, and the German Enlightenment.
HIS 144B
History of Germany since 1789

History of the German lands in the age of the French Revolution; 19th-century liberalism, nationalism, and industrialization; the World Wars, National Socialism, and the Holocaust; east and west Germany in the Cold War; the post-reunification scene. 
HIS 145
War & Revolution in Europe: 1789-1918

Survey of revolutionary movements, international crises, and wars in Europe from the French Revolution to World War I.
HIS 146A
Europe in the 20th Century

Survey of the history of Europe from 1919 to 1939.
HIS 146B
Europe in the 20th Century

Survey of the history of Europe since 1939.
HIS 147A
European Intellectual History: 1800-1870

European thought in the early industrial era. Shifting cultural frameworks, from romanticism to scientism; liberal and socialist reactions to social change. Focus on the work of Goethe, Hegel, J.S. Mill, Marx, Darwin and Flaubert.
HIS 147B
European Intellectual History: 1870-1920

Cultural and intellectual watershed of the late-19th and early-20th centuries. Emergence of modern art and literature; psychoanalysis and the new social sciences. Focus on the work of Baudelaire, Wagner, Nietzsche, Freud, Weber and Kafka.
HIS 147C
European Intellectual History: 1920-1970

European thought and culture since World War I. Coverage includes: literature and politics; Communism and Western Marxism; Fascism; Existentialism; Structuralism; Feminism. Particular attention to Lenin, Brecht, Hitler, Sartre, Camus, Beckett, Marcuse, Foucault, Woolf and de Beauvoir.
HIS 148A
Women & Society in Europe: 1500-1789

Roles and perceptions of women from the Renaissance to the French Revolution. Emphasis on social and economic factors as well as on discussions of women in the writings of political theorists and social commentators.
HIS 148B
Women & Society in Europe: 1789-1920

Roles and perceptions of women from the French Revolution to World War I, primarily in France and England. Emphasis on social and economic developments within a loosely chronological and comparative framework.
HIS 148C
Women in Society in Europe: 1914-Present

History of 20th-century Europe from the perspective of women and the family, and of sexual and gender relations. Emphasis on the impact on women of major events and movements, such as World War I, fascism, Soviet communism, World War II, the welfare state, feminism, and mass culture.
HIS 149
Comparative Cultural History of Modern Britain & France, 1880-1914

Cultural comparison of the histories of Britain and France during the fin de siecle. Addresses cultural debates of the period (including gender, race, class) and the practices of cultural history.
HIS 151A
England: The Middle Ages

Origins of England to the accession of the Lancastrians. Survey includes: impact of Norman Conquest on Anglo-Saxon institutions; rise of the Church, common law, parliament, and the economy; thought, arts, and literature to the age of Chaucer and Wyclif.
HIS 151B
England: The Early Modern Centuries

From Lancaster and York to the Glorious Revolution. Includes growth of the Church of England; beginnings of modern worldwide economy; rise of the gentry and parliament; thought, arts, and literature in the times of More, Shakespeare, Hobbes, Wren, and Newton.
HIS 151C
18th-Century England

English history from the Glorious Revolution to the French Revolution. Examination of the transformation of one of Europe's most politically unstable kingdoms into the firmly established constitutional monarchy which provided an environment fit to engender the industrial revolution.
HIS 151D
Industrial England

English history from Waterloo to the Battle of Britain; the rise and continuance of the first industrial nation, examining the transformation of landed to class society, oligarchy to democracy and bureaucracy, Bentham to Bloomsbury, empire to commonwealth.
HIS 156
Latin American Migration History

Migrations to, from, and within Latin America, with a focus on the period from independence to the present day. The historical development of settler colonialism, inter-regional migrations, rural-to-urban migration, migration promotion, restriction laws, naturalization, and sanctuary across Latin American scenarios. Research paper required.
HIS 158
Special Topics in Latin American History

Topics in the history of Latin America. Topics may be framed geographically (e.g., Central America), chronologically (e.g., The Cold War) or thematically (e.g., environmental history). 
HIS 159
Women & Gender in Latin American History

Roles of women and men in the history of Latin America, with an emphasis on the intersection of gender with racial and class categories. Introduction to the theoretical premises of women’s and gender history.
HIS 160
Spain & America in the 16th Century 

Atlantic world in the 16th century, particularly the transcultural and reciprocal social and economic relations between Spain and America in the course of colonization.
HIS 161
Human Rights in Latin America

History of the origins, denial and protection of Human Rights in Latin America. Emphasis on dictatorships, political violence, social resistance, democracy, justice, accountability, truth commissions, memory.
HIS 162
History of the Andean Region

History of the Andean region, the area that now comprises modern Peru, Bolivia, and Chile, from the beginning of human settlement to the present. May be taught abroad.
HIS 163A
History of Brazil

The history of colonial and imperial Brazil from 1500 to 1889. Written reports.
HIS 163B
History of Brazil

The history of the Brazilian republic from 1889 to the present.
HIS 164
History of Chile

Emphasis on the history of Chilean political economy from 1930 to the present. Various strategies of development (modernization, Marxism, Neo-Liberalism); the rise of mass politics; the course of foreign relations; and the richness of Chilean literature.
HIS 165
Latin American Social Revolutions

Major social upheavals since 1900 in selected Latin American nations; similarities and differences in cause, course, and consequence. May be taught abroad.
HIS 166A
History of Mexico to 1848

Political, economic, and social development of pre-Columbian, colonial and national Mexico to 1848.
HIS 166B
History of Mexico since 1848

History of Mexico from 1848 to the present.
HIS 167
Modern Latin American Cultural & Intellectual History

Introduce to the cultural and intellectual history of modern Latin America including architecture, cinema, painting, music and literature. 
HIS 168
History of Inter-American Relations

Diplomatic history of Latin America since independence, intra-LatinAmerican relations, relations with the United States, participation in international organizations, and communism in Latin America.
HIS 169A
Mexican-American History

Economic, social, religious, cultural and political development of the Spanish-speaking population of the Southwestern United States from about1800 to 1910.
HIS 169B
Mexican-American History

Role of the Mexican and Mexican-American or Chicano in the economy, politics, religion, culture and society of the Southwestern United States since 1910.
HIS 170A
Colonial America

Colonial society from 1607 to the American Revolution, with emphasis onEuropean expansion, political, social and economic foundations, colonial thought and culture, and imperial rivalry.
HIS 170B
The American Revolution

Analysis of the Revolutionary epoch with emphasis on the structure of British colonial policy, the rise of revolutionary movements, the War for Independence and its consequences, and the Confederation period.
HIS 170C
The Early National Period, 1789-1815

Political and social history of the American republic from the adoption of the Constitution through the War of 1812 and its consequences.
HIS 171A
Jacksonian America

Political and social history of the United States from the end of the War of 1812 to the Compromise of 1850. How the market revolution transformed American life, and led the nation towards war.
HIS 171A
Slavery, Society & Expansion in the Early U.S.

Political, social, economic history of early-19th century U.S. emphasizing slavery and expansion. The internal slave trade, the settlement of the Mississippi Valley and Far West, transformed economic and social relations, new reform movements.
HIS 171B
Civil War Era

Examination of the political and social history of the United States from the Compromise of 1850 to the end of the Civil War in 1865.  Causes of the war the war itself and the problems of reconstruction after the war.
HIS 171C
Reconstruction, America’s Second Founding

After the U.S. Civil War, from 1865 to 1876. Emphasis on end of slavery; expansion of civil rights, voting rights, and birthright citizenship; overthrow of biracial Southern governments; segregation and disfranchisement; culture of reconciliation.
HIS 171D
Selected Themes in 19th-Century American History

Interpretative overview of a single topic in the history of the United States in the 19th century. Sample topics include social history, the 1850s, and southern history.
HIS 172
American Environmental History

American history through connections between people and nature, pre-Columbus to climate change. Native America; conquest; epidemics; extinctions; industrialization; pollution; environmentalism; climate change and global warming; ideas of nature.
HIS 173
Becoming an American: Immigration & American Culture

Introduction to the wide range of immigrant experiences and cycles of nativism that have shaped American culture in the 20th century. From novels, memoirs and films, students will explore how external and internal immigration has created a multicultural society.
HIS 174A
The Gilded Age & Progressive Era: United States, 1876-1917

US history and the construction of modern America from the end of Reconstruction to US entry into World War I. Includes Southern redemption, Western incorporation, electoral corruption, labor movements, Populism, Progressivism, women's suffrage, US imperial expansion, and immigration restriction. 
HIS 174B
War, Prosperity, & Depression: United States, 1917-1945

America's emergence as a world power, the business culture of the 1920s, the New Deal and World War II. Emphasis on such issues as government regulation of the economy, welfare capitalism, and class, racial, ethnic, and gender conflicts.  
HIS 174C
The United States Since World War II, 1945 to the Present

America's struggle to respond to new complexities in foreign relations, social tensions, family changes and media. Emphasis on such topics as: Cold War; anticommunist crusade; civil rights, feminist and environmentalist movement; New Left; counterculture; Vietnam; Watergate; and the moral majority.
HIS 174D
Selected Themes in 20th-Century American History

Interpretive overview of a single topic in the history of the United States in the 20th century with attention to the phases and processes of historical change.
HIS 175
American Intellectual History

Exploration of the ideas that have shaped politics and society in the United States from colonial times to the present. Topics include American liberalism, republicanism, democracy, constitutionalism, communitarianism, utopianism, pragmatism, feminism, Darwinism, nationalism, conservatism, and economics.
HIS 176A
Cultural & Social History of United States

Study of social and cultural forces in American society in the 19th century with emphasis on social structure, work and leisure, socialization and the family, social reform movements and changes in cultural values.
HIS 176B
Cultural & Social History of United States

Study of social and cultural forces in American society in the 20th century with emphasis on social structure, work and leisure, socialization and the family, social reform movements and changes in cultural values.
HIS 177A
History of Black People & American Race Relations: 1450-1860

History of black people in the United States from the African background to Reconstruction.
HIS 177B
History of Black People & American Race Relations: 1860-Present

History of black people and race relations from 1860-present. Emphasis on Civil War, Reconstruction, Segregation, Age of Accommodation, black nationalism, urbanization, civil rights, and changing ideology of race relations.
HIS 178
Race In America 1492-1865


HIS 178
Water in the West: Environment & Politics in America's Arid Lands

Politics and environmental consequences of water development in the arid western United States since 1848, with emphasis on California and western rivers, including the Colorado, Columbia, Missouri, and Mississippi. Irrigated settlement, the making of state and federal water law and bureaucracy, urban vs. rural competition, Native water rights, growth of irrigation technologies, groundwater overdraft, wildlife impacts. One half-day field trip required.
HIS 179
Asian American History, 1850-Present

Historical experience of people of Asian ancestry in the United States from the mid-19th century to the present. Migration, labor, community formation, race relations, women and gender, popular culture.
HIS 180AN
American Political History, 1789-1896

Growth of American politics from the birth of the republic to the end of the 19th century. Development of political parties, the expanding electorate, and how social issues such as slavery shaped the political process.  
HIS 180BN
American Political History, 1896-present

Politics in the United States from 1896 to the present. Topics include race and partisan politics; communism and anti-communism; the New Deal and the centralization of government; and the rise of the imperial presidency.
HIS 180C
The Fight for the Right to Vote

History of the struggle for voting rights from the colonial period to the present.  Emphasis on the struggle for inclusion by African Americans, women, Latinos, and other groups.   
HIS 181
Religion in American History to 1890

American religious history from colonization through the Gilded Age. Topics include religious diversity in America; native American religion; Protestant evangelism; gender and religion; religion and bigotry; African American religion; religion in the Civil War; and religion’s response to modernization.  
HIS 182
Gender & Justice in American History

Intersection of gender and law in North America from the colonial period through the 20th century. Topics include witchcraft, suffrage, child custody, protective labor laws, regulation of sexuality. Analysis of legal change, trials, and cultural influences.
HIS 183A
The Frontier Experience: Trans-Mississippi West

The fur trade, western exploration and transportation, the Oregon Country, the Greater Southwest and the Mexican War, the Mormons, mining discovery, and the West during the Civil War.
HIS 183B
The Frontier Experience: Trans-Mississippi West

Spread of the mining kingdom, the range cattle industry, Indian-military affairs, settlement of the Great Plains and Rocky Mountain Regions and political organization of the West.
HIS 184
History of Sexuality in America

History of sexuality in America from pre-European through the late-20th century. Topics include birth control, marriage, sexual violence, prostitution, inter-racial relationships, heterosexuality and homosexuality, the feminist, gay, and lesbian liberation movements, AIDS, commercialization of sexuality.
HIS 185A
History of Science in America

Survey of the European background. Study of American scientificinstitutions, ideas, personalities, creative processes in science, and of relationships between society and science from colonial times to present.
HIS 185B
History of Technology in America

Study of American technology, emphasizing biographical approach to historical understanding of technological change, creative processes, institutions, ideas, and relationships between technology and societyfrom colonial times to present.
HIS 187
History of US Foreign Relations in the 20th Century

Rise of the U.S. to superpower standing during the 20th century, from colonialism to the war on terror, including political, diplomatic, cultural, and economic activities of both US government and private American agencies beyond U.S. borders.
HIS 188
America in the 1960s

Tumult and upheaval in American politics, culture, and society 1961-1969. Civil rights; Vietnam, the draft and the anti-war movement; rock and roll and the counterculture; modern feminism; modern conservatism; student movements; urban unrest and insurrection.
HIS 189
California History

California history from the pre-colonial period to the present including dispossession of California's Indians, political economy of the Spanish and Mexican periods, Gold Rush effects, industrialization, Hollywood, water politics, World War II, Proposition 13, and the emergence of Silicon Valley.
HIS 190A
Middle Eastern History I: The Rise of Islam, 600-1000

Middle Eastern history from the rise of Islam to the disintegration of the Abbasid Caliphate; the formative centuries of a civilization. Politics and religion, conquest and conversion, arts and sciences, Christians, Jews and Muslims, gender and sexuality, orthodoxy and heterodoxy.
HIS 190B
Middle Eastern History II: The Age of the Crusades, 1001-1400

Middle Eastern history during the age of the Crusades and Mongol invasions. The idea of holy war, the Crusades, the Mongols as the bearers of Chinese arts, nomads and sedentary life, feudalism, mysticism, slavery, women in the medieval Middle East.
HIS 190C
Middle Eastern History III: The Ottomans, 1401-1730

Middle Eastern history from the foundation of the Ottoman Empire on the borderlands of Byzantine Anatolia through its expansion into Europe, Asia, and Africa, creating a new cultural synthesis including the Arab, Greek, Islamic, Mongol, Persian, Slavic, and Turkish traditions.
HIS 190D
Middle Eastern History IV: Safavids Iran, 1300-1720

Middle Eastern history focusing on Safavid Empire (present-day Iran, Iraq, Afghanistan, up to Georgia), beginning with the origins of the dynasty as a powerful religious family, to the establishment of the Empire, focusing on Social, Religious, Economic, and Political History.
HIS 191A
Classical China

History of Chinese civilization from its origins through the establishment of city states and the flowering of classical philosophy,to the rise and fall of the First Empire.
HIS 191B
High Imperial China

Political disunion and the influx of Buddhism; reunification under the great dynasties of T'ang, Sung, and Ming with analysis of society, culture and thought.
HIS 191J
Sex & Society in Modern Chinese History

Role of sex, gender, and family relations in the development of Chinese politics, society, and personal life in the modern period, 1900-present.
HIS 193B
History of the Modern Middle East, From 1914

Middle East from the turn of the 20th century to the present. Themes include the legacy of imperialism, cultural renaissance, the World Wars, nationalism, Palestine/Israel, Islamic revival, gender, revolutionary movements, politics of oil and war, cultural modernism,exile and diaspora.
HIS 193C
The Middle East Environment: Historical Change & Current Challenges

Examines Middle East environment and human use of nature over last 10,000 years. Introduction to desert ecology, environmental history and current environmental problems. Case Studies of Egypt, Maghreb countries, Arabian peninsula/Gulf countries, desertification, water, indigenous knowledge, and national parks.
HIS 194A
Aristocratic & Feudal Japan

Broad survey of the cultural, social, religious, and political aspects of Japanese history from mythological times through the 16th century emphasizing comparison of the organizations, values, and beliefs associated with the aristocratic and feudal periods.
HIS 194B
Early Modern Japan

Survey of the cultural, social, economic,and political aspects of Japanese history from the 17th through the 19th centuries emphasizing the development of those patterns of thought and political organization with which Japan met the challenge of the nineteenth-century Western expansionism.
HIS 194C
Modern Japan

Survey of the cultural, social, economic, and political aspects of Japanese history in the 20th century emphasizing labor and social movements, militarism and the Pacific war, and the emergence of Japan as a major economic power.
HIS 194D
Business & Labor in Modern Japan

Survey of labor and management relations in Japan from the mid-18th century to the present.
HIS 194E
Education & Technology in Modern Japan

Survey of education and technology in Japan from the mid-18th century to the present.
HIS 195C
A History of Vietnam

Overview of Vietnamese history: early state formation in Southeast Asia; expansion/contention in the 17th and 18th centuries; colonial period; war with the US; and post-war developments (with an emphasis on relations with China and the US). 
HIS 196A
Medieval India

Survey of history of India in the millennium preceding arrival of British in the 18th century, focusing on interaction of the civilizations of Hinduism and Islam and on the changing nature of the state.
HIS 196B
Modern India

Survey of cultural, social, economic, and political aspects of South Asian history from arrival of the British in the 18th century to formation of new independent states-India, Bangladesh, and Pakistan in the 20th century.
HIS 201M
Sources & General Literature of History: Middle East

Addresses various theoretical and methodological approaches to the study of the Modern Middle East. Survey Modern Middle East historiography in light of theoretical innovations such as post-Orientalism, World Systems theory, and postcolonial theory. 
HIS 203A
Research Seminar

Designed for students preparing for higher degrees in history. Individual research and analysis resulting in substantial research paper of publishable quality. Completion required of all Ph.D. candidates. The three courses must be taken in continuous sequence, ordinarily during second year.
HIS 204
Historiography

Major issues in the philosophy and methodology of history.
HIS 298
Group Study


HIS 299
Research


HIS 299D
Research


HIS 390
Teaching History in College

Designed for teaching assistants with emphasis on problems and procedures encountered by teachers of lower division classes at the university.
HMR 001
Human Wrongs/Human Rights

Introduction to Human Rights and the problems they seek to address. Using key episodes of inhumanity like slavery, genocide, and racism. Examines how international movements for social justice led to the emergence of the international Human Rights system.
HMR 120A
Art, Architecture, & Human Rights

Study of human rights as they relate to art, architecture, and cultural heritage. Examines museums, art collections, and cultural-heritage management, their relation to the cultural prerogatives of communities and indigenous groups, and protection of cultural heritage during war and conflict.
HMR 134
Human Rights

Introduction to the interdisciplinary study of the origins, evolution, denial and protection of Human Rights.
HMR 136
Human Rights in the Middle East

Study of the experience of Human Rights in the modern Middle East, with special attention to the Human Rights issues raised by events of Arab Spring; Palestine-Israel conflict; history of genocide, mass killing and totalitarianism in the region.
HMR 138
Human Rights, Gender, & Sexuality

Gender and sexuality in the context of human rights. Topics include women's participation in the public sphere, the right to change gender, the right for family privacy, and the right to marriage. 
HMR 140A
Human Rights & the Popular Imagination

Arts, music, literature, film and television in the rise of human rights movements and the protection, promotion and violation of human rights. Topics may include: human rights & science fiction; human rights & the graphic novel; human rights & contemporary cinema; human rights and  rock & roll.
HMR 140A
Human Rights & the Popular Imagination

Arts, music, literature, film and television in the rise of human rights movements and the protection, promotion and violation of human rights. Topics may include: human rights & science fiction; human rights & the graphic novel; human rights & contemporary cinema; human rights & rock and roll.
HMR 140B
The Art & Politics of Memory in Latin America: Truth, Justice, & Reconciliation

Critical analysis of the dictatorships and civil conflicts that took place in Cold War Latin America. Case studies focus on the violation of human rights as well as on the political and cultural battles for truth, justice, and reconciliation that take place in the aftermath of those violations. Emphasis on how memory is constructed, in what forms, by whom, and for what purposes.
HMR 161
Human Rights in Latin America

History of the origins, denial and protection of Human Rights in Latin America. Emphasis on dictatorships, political violence, social resistance, democracy, justice, accountability, truth commissions, memory.
HMR 162Y
The History of Human Rights in Europe 

History of the origins, development, and state of international humanitarian law (IHL) and international human rights law (IHRL) in Europe. Emphasis on Enlightenment-era and modern theories of the source, utility, and limits of human rights.
HMR 190
Seminar

Emphasis on current scholarly debate about the methods for analyzing and comparing diverse human rights issues with the intention of integrating disciplined study of the field.
HNR 094
Honors Seminar

Collaborative, multidisciplinary exploration of complex contemporary problem. Focus on critical thinking and analytical interpretation, on oral and written communication, and on the use of electronic media in gathering information.
HPH 400
Human Physiology

General and cellular physiology of neurons, muscle, and epithelial cells and systemic physiology of cardiovascular, respiratory, gastrointestinal, and renal systems.
HRT 298
Group Study


HUM 001
Humanities Forum

Reading and discussion of a single work representative of a particular culture, historical period, or genre and significant for its ongoing cultural impact in the humanities, sciences, social sciences, technology, and popular arenas. Attention to provocative implications for contemporary society.
HUM 001
Humanities Forum

Reading and discussion of a single work representative of a particular culture, historical period, or genre and significant for its ongoing cultural impact in the humanities, sciences, social sciences, technology, and popular arenas. Attention to provocative implications for contemporary society.
HUM 002A
Global Humanities Forum

Introduction to humanities topics and methodologies; analysis of major figures, works, and genres in world arts and literatures, with emphasis on relationships between history, society, and culture.
HUM 002B
American Humanities Forum

Introduction to humanities topics and methodologies; analysis of major figures, works, and genres in American arts and literatures, with emphasis on relationships between history, society, and culture.
HUM 004
Animals & Human Culture

Meaning of human relations with animals studied across a variety of historical periods and cultures and from a variety of humanistic perspectives.
HUM 009
Don Quixote & the Modern World

Reading Don Quixote as emblem of modernity in the West. Issues of reality versus illusion, heroism, freedom and self-fulfillment, racial tolerance and love. Don Quixote in other cultural and popular media: film, dance, art, musical drama, and television. GE credit with concurrent enrollment in HUM 009D: ArtHum, Wrt.
HUM 010
How to be a Critic: Understanding Cultural Products & Practices

Introduction to key topics and methodologies of interest to humanists. Series uses a variety of critical approaches to examine the cultural significance of subjects such as: fashion, film, architecture, music, food, dance.
HUM 010D
How to be a Critic: Discussion

Optional discussion section can be taken concurrently with HUM 10. Small group discussions and preparation of short papers.
HUM 013
Witches: Myth & Historical Reality

Examines the historical construction of the witch. Four areas covered are: European pagan religions and the spread of Christianity; the "Burning' Times" in early modern Europe; 17th-century New England and the Salem witch trials; and fairy tales.
HUM 015
Language & Identity

Introduction to topics related to the construction of identity through language use, including geographical and social factors affecting language groups. Language ideology affecting linguistic groups, including bilinguals and non-native speakers of English.
HUM 092
Internship

Internships in fields where students can practice their skills.
HUM 144
Marx, Nietzsche, Freud

Study of major texts of Marx, Nietzsche, and Freud, selected with an eye to their impact on 20th-century economics, ethics, and attitudes toward eros. Particular focus on conceptions of the self and the individual's relation to society.  
HUM 180
Topics in the Humanities

Analysis of interdisciplinary issues in the Humanities. Topics vary. May be taught abroad.
HUM 192
Internship

Internships in fields where students can practice their skills.
HUM 298
Directed Group Study


HUM 299
Individual Research

Individual research in the humanities resulting in a formal written research report.
HYD 010
Water, Power, Society

Water resources issues. How water has been used to gain and wield socio-political power. Water resources development in California as related to current and future sustainability of water quantity and quality. Roles of science and policy in solving water problems.
HYD 198
Directed Group Study

Directed group study. May be taught abroad.
HYD 201A
Hydrologic Sciences Core Survey

Considers the primary sub-disciplines while reviewing the fundamental scientific concepts/processes of the hydrologic sciences research community, and includes a basic writing component. 
HYD 201B
Hydrologic Sciences Core Seminar

Exposes students to the research underway in the Hydrologic Sciences Graduate Group as well as provide them the opportunity to present and refine their research through interaction with other students in the Graduate Group.
HYD 245
Climate Change, Water & Society

Integration of climate science and hydrology with policy to understand hydroclimatology and its impact upon natural and human systems. Assignments: readings, take-home examination on climate and hydrologic science, paper that integrates course concepts into a research prospectus or review article.
HYD 254Y
Ecohydraulics

Use of 2D hydrodynamic modeling to perform instream flow assessment by exploring flow-dependent hydraulic patterns at multiple spatial scales and extrapolating results with empirical and analytical functions to evaluate geomorphic resilience and ecological functions.
HYD 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum


IAD 010
Introduction to International Agricultural Development

Theories, practices and institutions relating to agricultural development; the interaction of changing social, cultural and economic organization through successive stages of economic development; impact of new agricultural technology on underdeveloped regions.
IAD 142
Equipment & Technology for Small Farms

Types and characteristics of agricultural equipment and technologies appropriate for small commercial farming. Adjustment and calibration of equipment. Selection of and budgeting for equipment.
IAD 190
Proseminar in International Agricultural Development

Presentation and discussion of current topics in international agricultural development by visiting lecturers, staff and students.
IAD 200N
Philosophy & Practice of Agricultural Development

Introduces key elements of philosophy and practice of agricultural development in less developed countries; major paradigms of development; historical context within which these paradigms operate; various development techniques and initiatives emerging from agricultural production to institutional capacity building and management.
IDI 192
Research Internship in Internal Medicine

Supervised work experience in the division of Infectious Diseases. Undergraduates will have an opportunity to acquire research experience in clinical settings.
IDI 493
Correctional Medicine SSM; Evaluation of HIV & Hepatitis C Patients

Primary agenda focuses on the evaluation of treatment of HIV and Hepatitis C patients in the correctional environment.
IMD 090
Seminar in Medical Ethics

Seminar Series covering the current topics in Medical Ethics.
IMD 164
Practicum in Community Health Clinic: Bayanihan Clinic

Through active participation in the medical aspects of community health clinics, the undergraduate student gains knowledge of the organization, administration, and problem-solving capabilities.
IMD 214
Topics in Medical Ethics

The complex moral, legal and ethical dilemmas that patients, families, and health care providers face in today's clinics. 
IMD 250
Medicine & the Law

Legal and bioethical principles and concepts in medicine. Topics include standard of care, informed consent, reproductive medicine, and end-of-life issues.
IMD 414
One Health: A Course on Global Health

Global health problems are complex and require culturally-sensitive, socially-acceptable, and action-oriented approaches to create practical and cost-effective solutions. Will examine major health problems created by the convergence of human, animal, and environmental influences.
IMD 464
Bayanihan Primary Care Clinic

Under the guidance and supervision of a physician, medical students will learn patient history taking, medical documentation, counseling, diagnosis and treatment of patients with chronic and acute disease. Provides exposure to the special needs of various ethnic and socioeconomic groups.
IMD 490
Medical Care for Underserved & Marginalized Communities

Review the evidence about health outcomes for marginalized communities, to use the frameworks of ‘structural competency’ and ‘implicit bias’ to understand phenomena that drive disparities, to study the cases of several underserved communities in the Sacramento area, experience first-hand community organizations that are providing care to marginalized communities and practice how to identify in the clinical setting unmet social needs and their impact on health.
IMD 499
General Medicine Reseach


IMM 201L
Advanced Immunology Laboratory Rotations

Laboratory assignment in two research laboratories. Individual research problems with emphasis on methodological/procedural experience and experimental design. Student writes a project outline and gives oral presentation.
IMM 202L
Advanced Immunology Laboratory Rotations

One four-week and one six week assignment in immunology research laboratories. Individual research problems with an emphasis on methodological/procedural experience and experimental design.
IMM 203
Cancer Immunology

Covers concepts in cancer biology, progression and immune evasion. It will also cover topics such as: immune surveillance, immune effector mechanisms and current concepts in immune therapy. 
IRE 001
Global Interdependence

Development of the concept of global interdependence along its political, economic, demographic, cultural, technological, and environmental dimensions. Focus on the ways societies and states interact. Provides the foundation for upper division multidisciplinary work in international relations.
IST 008
Colloquium

Lectures, films, and readings on the interrelation between the arts and sciences.
IST 008A
Special Topics in Natural Science & Mathematics

Group study of a special topic in natural sciences and mathematics. Varies with topic offered.
IST 008B
Special Topics in Humanities

Group study of a special topic in humanities. Varies with topic offered.
IST 008C
Special Topics in the Social Sciences

Group study of a special topic in the Social Sciences. Varies with topic offered.
IST 009
Seminar

Preparation of a research report. Normally taken with IST 008. 
ITA 001
Elementary Italian

Introduction to Italian grammar and development of all language skills in a cultural context with special emphasis on communication. 
ITA 001A
Accelerated Intensive Elementary Italian

Special 12-week accelerated, intensive summer session course that combines the work of ITA 001, ITA 002, and ITA 003.  Introduction to Italian grammar and development of all language skills in a cultural context with emphasis on communicative ability.
ITA 001S
Elementary Italian

Introduction to Italian grammar and development of all language skills in a cultural context with special emphasis on communication. May be taught abroad.
ITA 050
Studies in Italian Cinema

Introduction to Italian cinema through its genres. Focus is on cinema as a reflection of and a comment on modern Italian history. Film will be studied as an artistic medium and as a form of mass communication.
ITA 107
Survey of Italian Culture & Institutions

Assessment of the impact of regional autonomy on Italian cultural life from the Middle Ages to the present. Special emphasis will be placed upon achievements in literature, the arts, philosophy, and socio-political institutions. Taught in English.
ITA 107S
Survey of Italian Culture & Institutions

Assessment of the impact of regional autonomy on Italian cultural life from the Middle Ages to the present. Special emphasis will be placed upon achievements in literature, the arts, philosophy, and socio-political institutions. May be taught abroad.
ITA 108
Contemporary Issues in Italian Culture & Society

Analysis of cultural issues in contemporary Italy: Myth and reality of imagined Italies, Italian identities; immigration and race relations; the media and popular culture. Taught in Englsih.
ITA 108S
Contemporary Issues in Italian Culture & Society

Analysis of cultural issues in contemporary Italy; myth and reality of imagined Italies; Italian identities; immigration and race relations; the media and popular culture. May be taught abroad & in English. 
ITA 139B
Italian Literature in English: Boccaccio, Petrarch & the Renaissance

Petrarch and Boccaccio and their relations to the Middle Ages and the Renaissance; the Renaissance, with particular attention to the works of Lorenzo de' Medici, Leonardo da Vinci, Machiavelli, Ariosto, Michelangelo, and Tasso.
JPN 001
Elementary Japanese

Introduction to spoken and written Japanese in cultural contexts, withemphasis on communication. 
JPN 001A
Accelerated Intensive Elementary Japanese

Special 12-week accelerated, intensive summer session course that combines the work of JPN 001, JPN 002 and JPN 003. Introduction to Japanese grammar and development of all language skills in a cultural context with emphasis on communication.
JPN 001AS
Intensive Elementary Japanese

Intensive course taught combining the work of JPN 001, JPN 002 and JPN 003. Introduction to Japanese grammar and development of all language skills in a cultural context with emphasis on communication. Taught abroad in Japan.
JPN 010
Masterworks of Japanese Literature (in English)

Introduction to Japanese literature: readings and discussion in English of important works from earliest times to the present.
JPN 010
Masterworks of Japanese Literature (in English)

Introduction to Japanese literature: readings and discussion in English of important works from earliest times to the present.
JPN 015S
Introduction to Japanese Culture

Aspects of Japanese culture: literature, history, religion, art, language, and society. Taught abroad in Japan; in English.
JPN 050
Introduction to the Literature of China & Japan

Methods of literary analysis and their application to major works from the various genres of Chinese and Japanese literature (in translation), including film. East Asian cultural traditions will also be introduced.
JPN 101
Japanese Literature in Translation: The Early Period

Study of early Japanese literature from the Nara to the end of the Heian period through a broad survey of the major literary genres such as lyric poetry, court diaries, prose narratives, poem-tales, and classical Chinese writings.
JPN 102
Japanese Literature in Translation: The Middle Period

Study of the major literary genres from the 12th century to the second half of the 19th century including poetry, linked-verse, military chronicles, no drama, Buddhist literature, haiku, haibun, kabuki, bunraku, plays and Edo prose narratives.
JPN 102
Japanese Literature in Translation: The Middle Period

Study of the major literary genres from the 12th century to the second half of the 19th century including poetry, linked-verse, military chronicles, no drama, Buddhist literature, haiku, haibun, kabuki, bunraku, plays and Edo prose narratives.
JPN 103
Japanese Literature in Translation: The Modern Period

Modern Japanese literature from the 1870s to the 1970s. Surveys representative literary works and ideas against the social and intellectual background of the Meiji, Taisho, and Showa periods.
JPN 103
Japanese Literature in Translation: The Modern Period

Modern Japanese literature from the late 19th century to the present with focus on the concept of modernity; in addition to the study of authors and genres, examines historical and cultural contexts. Lectures, readings and discussions in English.  
JPN 104
Modern Japanese Literature: War & Revolution

Perspectives and sensibilities with which major modern Japanese writers have interpreted the traumatic and often poignant experiences of war and socio-political upheavals from the late 19th century to the 1970s. Lectures, discussions, and readings in English.
JPN 105
Modern Japanese Literature: Hero & Anti-Hero

Ways in which representative hero and anti-hero protagonists in modern Japanese literature perceive, confront, challenge, and resolve a wide array of social, political, and moral problems of their times. Taught in English.
JPN 106
Japanese Culture Through Film

Aspects of Japanese culture such as love, sexuality, war, the military, the family, the position of women, growing up and death as portrayed in Japanese cinema. Lectures, discussion, and readings in English. Films with English subtitles.
JPN 107
Modern Japanese Autobiographies (in English)

Exploring the modern and contemporary Japanese social and cultural landscape through critical analysis of modern Japanese autobiographies by prominent and other authors in the 19th and 20th centuries.
JPN 108
Poetry of China & Japan (in English)

A comparative approach to Chinese and Japanese poetry, examining poetic practice in the two cultures; includes a general outline of the two traditions, plus study of poetic forms, techniques, and distinct treatments of universal themes: love, nature, war, etc.
JPN 109
Japanese Popular Culture

Japanese popular culture, from its medieval/early modern precedents to contemporary incarnations. Emphasis on major forms of popular culture that emerged in the 20th century, including comics, animation, science fiction, and fantasy.
JPN 116
Culture & History in Kyoto

Intensive course exploring the historical and cultural riches in Kyoto and its environs. May be taught abroad on-site in and around Kyoto, Japan.
JPN 152
Traditional Japanese Drama

Survey in English of Japanese drama, focusing on traditional forms: noh, kyôgen, bunraku puppet theater, and kabuki, with some attention to modern theater. Texts of plays and secondary works on performance techniques and the composition of plays.  
JPN 152
Traditional Japanese Drama

Survey in English of Japanese drama, focusing on traditional forms: noh, kyôgen, bunraku puppet theater, and kabuki, with some attention to modern theater. Texts of plays and secondary works on performance techniques and the composition of plays.  
JPN 153
Love, Sexuality & the Family in Modern Japanese Literature

Modern Japanese literature from the late-19th century to the present with a focus on love and sexuality in various forms, particularly as understood through the evolving institution of the Japanese family. Lectures, readings and discussions in English.  
JPN 153
Love, Sexuality & the Family in Modern Japanese Literature

Modern Japanese literature from the late-19th century to the present with a focus on love and sexuality in various forms, particularly as understood through the evolving institution of the Japanese family. Lectures, readings and discussions in English.  
JPN 154
Tourism & Heritage in Japan

Focus on related concepts of tourism and cultural heritage within Japan, with attention to questions of tradition, authenticity and nostalgia. Examination of cultural heritage sites on various scales, including built environment, national cultural forms, and local performances such as festivals.
JPN 155
Introduction to Japanese Folklore

Focus on narrative genres of myth, legend, and folktale, with additional attention paid to festivals, folk art, belief systems, and the development of folklore studies (minzokugaku) as an academic discipline. Examination the relationship of folklore to ethnic and national identity.
JPN 156
Japanese Literature on Film

Survey of films based on works of Japanese literature, emphasis on pre-modern and early modern texts. Introduction to major directors of Japan, with a focus on cinematic adaptation. Lectures and readings in English. Films in Japanese with English subtitles.
JPN 157
Japanese Women Writers

Survey of women writers from earliest times to the present. Genres include poetry, narrative fiction, diaries, short stories, novels, and film. Representative authors include Murasaki Shikibu, Sei Shônagon, Higuchi Ichiyo, Enchi Fumiko and Ogawa Yôko. Readings and discussion in English.
JPN 158
The Supernatural in Japan

Depictions of the supernatural in Japanese history through the contemporary era. Overview of Japanese literary and visual arts and the socio-historical contexts of the supernatural. Lectures and readings in English. Films in Japanese with English subtitles. 
JPN 160
The Culture of Japanese Food

Study of Japanese food and the culture of eating and drinking in Japan. Attention to symbolism, historical development, aesthetics, identity and global contexts. Materials examined include critical sources as well as literary texts, art, and films. 
JPN 162
Japan Travelogue: Ethnographic Writing on Japanese Culture & People

Focuses on ethnographic writing about Japan. Includes modern scholarly ethnographies, travel writing, blog posts, etc. Critical analysis of how the Japanese “other” is represented across time. 
JST 010
Introduction to Jewish Cultures

Diverse Jewish cultures created over the past 2,000 years using examples from less-familiar communities such as India, China, and Ethiopia.  Topics include the tensions between homeland/diaspora and questions of identity (race, nationality, culture, or religion).
JST 121
Oral History & Jewish Life

Oral history methodologies and application to an in-depth oral history interview about Jewish life. Topics include oral history practices and ethics, immigration, migration, religious practice, ethnic relations, and community organization structures.
LAT 001
Elementary Latin

Introduction to basic grammar and vocabulary and development of translation skills with emphasis on Latin to English. 
LAW 200
Introduction to Law

Introduction to basic concepts of the law, the historical roots of common law and equity, the precedent system in its practical operation,the modes of reasoning used by courts and attorneys, and the fundamentals of statutory interpretation.
LAW 200A
U.S. Legal System Seminar (LL.M.)

History and fundamental principles of the United States legal system. Important current legal issues, developments and trends. Required for LL.M. students who have not attended a U.S. law school. Fall semester only.
LAW 200B
U.S. Legal Methods I (LL.M.)

Designed to provide background skills necessary to succeed in both law school and legal practice. Gain an introductory working knowledge of the US legal methods which includes learning various forms of legal writing and speaking.
LAW 200BT
U.S. Legal Methods A (LL.M.)

Designed to provide background skills necessary to succeed in both law school and legal practice. Gain an introductory working knowledge of the U.S. legal method which includes learning various forms of legal writing and speaking.
LAW 200C
U.S. Legal Methods II (LL.M.)

Designed to provide background skills necessary to succeed in both law school and legal practice. Gain an introductory working knowledge of the US legal method which includes learning various forms of legal writing and speaking.
LAW 200CT
U.S. Legal Methods B (LL.M.)

Designed to provide background skills necessary to succeed in both law school and legal practice. Gain an introductory working knowledge of the U.S. legal method which includes learning various forms of legal writing and speaking.
LAW 200DT
Advanced Introduction to American Legal Concepts & Methods (LL.M.)

Building on the Introduction to American Law course, provides additional instruction in American law and legal methods. Audit selected substantive courses and produce a series of legal memoranda.
LAW 200E
American Legal Concepts II (LL.M.)

Designed to provide basic skills necessary to succeed in both law school and legal practice.
LAW 200L
Lawyering Process Lab

Lab which accompanies Lawyering Skills course for first-year law students.
LAW 200S
Lawyering Process

Hone interactive lawyering skills needed for effective transactional and litigation work, including client interviewing and negotiation. Learn the role that interpersonal skills play in effective lawyering and contemplate the professional identity they wish to cultivate.
LAW 202
Contracts

Examines sorts of promises that are enforced and the nature of protection given promissory obligations in both commercial and noncommercial transactions. Inquiry is made into the means by which traditional doctrine adjusts or fails to adjust to changing social demands
LAW 203
Civil Procedure

Study of the fundamental and recurrent problems in civil actions including the methods used by federal and state courts to resolve civil disputes.
LAW 204
Torts

Familiarizes students with legal rules, concepts and approaches pertinent to the recovery for personal injuries, property damages and harm done to intangible interests. 
LAW 205
Constitutional Law I

Principles, doctrines and controversies regarding the basic structure of and division of powers in American government. Specific topics include judicial review, jurisdiction, standing to sue, federalism, federal and state powers and immunities, and the separation of powers among the branches of the federal government.
LAW 206
Criminal Law

Study of the bases and limits of criminal liability. Coverage of the constitutional, statutory, and case law rules which define, limit, andprovide defenses to individual liability for the major criminal offenses.
LAW 207
Legal Research & Writing I

Integrated legal research and writing skills course taught by Wydick Fellowship Program faculty. Basic legal research resources and strategies are introduced and practiced. Fall semester.
LAW 207A
Legal Research (LL.M.)

Description of the evolution and use of sources of law and secondary authority. 
LAW 207B
Advanced Legal Research

Introduction to advanced legal research tools and techniques used in practice, including efficient computer research techniques. 
LAW 208
Legal Research & Writing II

Focuses on persuasive writing and oral advocacy. Complete integrated research and writing assignments, including a complaint, a strategic defense office memorandum, a motion to dismiss in federal court, and an appellate brief, with oral arguments by all students.
LAW 208A
Legal Research & Writing II (LL.M.)

Persuasive writing and oral advocacy. LL.M. students complete integrated research and writing assignments, including a complaint, a strategic defense office memorandum, a motion to dismiss in federal court, and an appellate brief with oral arguments.
LAW 208G
U.S. Legal Methods A (LL.M.)

Designed to provide foreign and other students with background skills necessary to succeed in both law school and legal practice.
LAW 208H
U.S. Legal Methods B (LL.M.) 

Description of the evolution and use of sources of law and secondary authority.
LAW 208M
LL.M. Legal Essay Writing A

Improve legal writing skills with a focus on law school essay exams. Focuses on the following skills: 1) how to understand the goals of a US law school exam and the expectations of the professor; 2) how to structure an answer logically; 3) how to write clearly; 4) how to explain reasoning and discuss complex legal issues. Experiential class.
LAW 208N
LL.M Legal Essay Writing B

Improve legal writing skills with a focus on bar essay exams. Focuses on the following skills: 1) how to understand the goals of a US bar; 2) how to structure an answer logically; 3) how to write clearly; 4) how to explain reasoning and discuss complex legal issues. Experiential class.
LAW 209B
Patent Prosecution & Practice

Examines core requirements and strategies for drafting and prosecuting a patent application before the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office. Interact with real inventors and US PTO examiners to gain the experience of getting a patent issued.
LAW 209C
Patentable Subject Matter: Genes, Methods, & Software 

In-depth look at recent cases and debates behind genetic patenting, software; business models; diagnostic methods, and others. Reviews the crucial and rapidly evolving field of patent law which affects some of the most important hi-tech industries. 
LAW 209DT
Innovation Law

Explores range of legal issues that innovation lawyers face, from establishing a start-up to high stakes technology mergers & acquisitions, to data protection and privacy, protecting intellectual property through strategic patent litigation.
LAW 209E
Patent Litigation

Introduces the basics of Patent Law and examines the U.S. patent enforcement system. Learn how a patent litigation proceeds, focusing on both pre- and post-trial proceedings and examines substantive patent laws.
LAW 209G
Privacy, Technology, & the Law

Seminar evaluates the privacy law issues that arise from technological advancements and data trade transactions. Likely topics that the course will cover include the Internet of Things and legal responses to privacy related problems, such as the European General Data Protection Regulation and the California Consumer Privacy Act of 2018.
LAW 210
Reforming the Police & Criminal Justice

Focus on major current issues: policing ethnic neighborhoods; use of deadly force; modernizing the work of prosecutors and defense counsel.
LAW 210B
Sociology of Criminal Procedure

What are the expectations and roles of the police in a democratic society? We need order maintenance and crime control, but to assume these tasks the police sometimes intrude upon interests considered fundamental to free societies.
LAW 210B
Law of Policing

What are the expectations and roles of the police in a democratic society? We need order maintenance and crime control, but to assume these tasks the police sometimes intrude upon interests considered fundamental to free societies.
LAW 210C
Sexual Assault & the Law

Criminal law of sexual assault, traditional and modern offenses, and proposals for reform. Discussion of procedural developments, victim’s counsel, evidentiary reform, and ADR. Implications for civil law, tort liability, Title VI, Title IX, and civil liability of perpetrators.
LAW 210DT
Wrongful Convictions

Explore the magnitude and complexity of the wrongful convictions, their causes and remedies under existing law, and possible fixes (reforms). Emphasizes relevant legal rules (Criminal Procedure, Evidence, Post-Conviction Review).
LAW 210ET
Race, Mass Incarceration & Policing

Key issues in the historical development and the current state of modern American imprisonment, policing structures, and the criminal justice system in relation to race.
LAW 210F
Restorative Justice

Explore both the theory and practice of restorative justice as an alternative approach to the retributive justice model of our current criminal law system and many other institutions.
LAW 210G
Aoki Center Restorative Justice Practicum

Learn about restorative justice principles and practices, receive training in restorative justice facilitation, and participate in and lead restorative justice circles in Davis and Sacramento schools, Yolo County Juvenile Hall, and other venues.
LAW 210G
Aoki Center Restorative Justice Practicum

Learn about restorative justice principles and practices, receive training in restorative justice facilitation, and participate in and lead restorative justice circles in Davis & Sacramento schools, Yolo County Juvenile Hall, and other venues.
LAW 210K
Sexual Assaults in the Criminal Justice System

Focuses on the criminal prosecution and defense of sexual assaults, from reporting to sentencing, through examination of pertinent criminal statutes, evidence code sections, jury instructions, court documents and specific case studies.
LAW 211
Negotiations

Skills course teaches theoretical and empirical approaches to negotiation strategy for the purposes of making deals and resolving disputes. Participate in simulations to hone their negotiation skills, and write analytical papers.
LAW 211C
Negotiating Joint Ventures

Business negotiation and dispute resolution strategies through simulations, reading, and writing assignments.
LAW 212A
Medical Liability Law & Policy

Considers the many ways in which society seeks to establish and maintain quality in patient care.
LAW 213T
Terrorism & International Law

International terrorism remains a pressing concern. Devising effective remedies for responding to it within the bounds of the law is critical. The new generation of international lawyers needs to be familiar with the relevant law and standards.
LAW 214A
Migration, Work, & Taxation

Explores workers’ and prospective workers’ choices to move from one place to another, both across and within national borders.  In particular, explores how tax policy and broader economic forces shape those choices.
LAW 215
Business Associations

Legal rules and concepts applicable to business associations, both public and closely held. Corporate form of organization, partnerships and other associational forms. 
LAW 215B
Corporate Integrity & Responsibility

Equips future business lawyers with the legal knowledge and technical skills to better understand, the U.S, European and Asian (select jurisdictions) regulatory responses to ethical and socially responsible corporate governance practices. Instruction seeks to re-define the aim of corporate governance as a tool to address efficiency, reduce agency costs and improve access to capital, as well as an emerging anti-corruption tool and a means to ensure more ethical corporate behavior.
LAW 215S
Special Session Business Associations

Provides a broad survey of the legal rules and concepts applicable to business associations, both public and closely.  
LAW 216A
Law & Religion

Federal constitutional law relating to religion; the interpretation and application of the Free Exercise Clause and the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment. 
LAW 217
Insurance Law

Covers the following topics: I. Insurance Law and Society, II. The Impact of Insurance, III. Contract Law Foundations, IV. First-Party Insurance, V. Liability Insurance: Coverage Issues, VI. Liability Insurance: Relationship Issues.
LAW 217A
Comparative Telecommunications Law

Explores the key issues facing policy-makers in designing telecommunications regulatory systems (e.g. licensing, universal service, economic regulation, relationship with antitrust law), and the various ways in which different jurisdictions have chosen to address these issues.
LAW 218
Constitutional Law II

Principally covers the First Amendment and the Equal Protection Clause. 
LAW 218A
Constitutional Law II: Equal Protection 

Focuses on the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
LAW 218B
Constitutional Law II: First Amendment

Principally covers the free speech clause of the First Amendment.
LAW 218D
Constitutional Theory Seminar

Provides students with a broad understanding of the shape of modern constitutional theory, and the ability to understand the implications of that theory for concrete historical and modern constitutional disputes.
LAW 218ET
California Constitutional Law 

Reviews, interpretive meta-rules for constitutional construction, structure and institutions of state government, civil liberties under the Declaration of Rights, the impact of race in California society, and criminal law.
LAW 218F
Implicit Bias & the Law: Modern Forms of Discrimination

Provides an opportunity to analyze modern forms of discrimination, learn about cutting edge developments in this area, and explore effective ways to address these issues through the law. 
LAW 218T
Selected Topics in Constitutional Law 

Examines two core themes of Constitutional Law I and Federal Jurisdiction: federalism and separation of powers. Concentrates on habeas corpus and the Eleventh Amendment as vehicles for examining the constitutional themes in greater depth.    
LAW 218TA
Separation of Powers

Study of the separation of powers in our federal government by focusing on certain historical events and their impact on constitutional law. 
LAW 218TB
Law of War

Surveys the law of armed conflict as it applies to today’s battlefields. 
LAW 218TC
Antidiscrimination Law

Offers an overview of federal constitutional and statutory anti-discrimination law in the United States. 
LAW 219
Evidence

Covers rules regarding the admissibility of proof during civil and criminal cases, including rules governing relevancy, hearsay, the examination and impeachment of witnesses, expert opinion, and constitutional and statutory privileges.  
LAW 219
Evidence

Covers rules regarding the admissibility of proof during civil and criminal cases, including rules governing relevancy, hearsay, the examination and impeachment of witnesses, expert opinion, and constitutional & statutory privileges.  
LAW 219
Evidence

Covers rules regarding the admissibility of proof during civil and criminal cases, including rules governing relevancy, hearsay, the examination and impeachment of witnesses, expert opinion, and constitutional & statutory privileges.  
LAW 219B
E-Discovery & Digital Evidence

Examines the interplay between the significant e-discovery rules and case law, and the process of electronic discovery, beginning with the duty to preserve electronically stored information (ESI), to the search, identification, collection, review and production of ESI in litigation.
LAW 220
Federal Income Taxation

Surveys the federal income tax system, with consideration of the nature of income, when and to whom income is taxable, exclusions from the tax base, deductions and credits, and tax consequences of property ownership and disposition. 
LAW 220A
State & Local Taxation

Introduction to fundamentals of state and local taxation. Beginning with historical and constitutional aspects, analyze recent developments in state and local taxation and their impact on client representation.
LAW 220B
Tax & Distributive Justice 

Advanced tax course designed as an introduction to issues of tax policy, with particular emphasis on tax distribution (i.e., who or what should pay taxes in society) and tax incidence (i.e., who or what ends up paying taxes in society).
LAW 220BT
Law of Banking & Financial Institutions

Guide to dual regulatory system, and an understanding of banks and other financial institutions, such as thrifts, credit unions, industrial banks, finance companies, and money transmitters, as well as large versus community banks.
LAW 220S
Special Session Federal Income Taxation

Introduction to the basic principles of federal income taxation using the American federal tax model.  Topics include identification of income subject to taxation, gains and losses from property transactions, the timing of income and deductions and the identity of people subject to tax on particular items of income.
LAW 220T
State & Local Taxation

Introduction to fundamentals of state and local taxation. Beginning with historical and constitutional aspects, analyze recent developments in state and local taxation and their impact on client representation.
LAW 221
Trusts, Wills and Estates

Study of the law of decedent’s estates, wills, and trusts. 
LAW 221
Trusts, Wills & Estates

Study of the law of decedent’s trusts, wills, and estates. 
LAW 221
Trusts, Wills & Estates

Study of the law of decedent’s trusts, wills, and estates. 
LAW 221A
Practical Skills in Will & Trust Drafting & Administration

Provides the skills to practice law in the area of estate planning and probate/trust administration. Follow an estate planning client and draft actual estate plan documents. A series of related topics will be explored.
LAW 222
Critical Race Theory Seminar

Examines race relations and racial discrimination in America through the perspectives of proponents of the Critical Race Theory (CRT) movement, a collection of legal scholars who challenge both conservative and liberal political orthodoxies.
LAW 222A
Latinos & Latinas & the Law

Seminar analyzes some of the legal issues of particular relevance to the Latino community in the United States, including racial identity, immigration, language regulation, national and transnational identity issues, affirmative action, and civil rights.
LAW 222B
Asian Pacific Americans & Law

Examines how American Law has shaped Asian Pacific American demographics, experiences, and status in American society.
LAW 222CT
Anti-Corruption Law in India

Addresses the impact of large corruption scandals on long term social trust, in light of Indian coal block and 2G spectrum allocation scandals.
LAW 223
Estate Planning Seminar

Selected topics in the estates and trusts area. Content varies with instructor.
LAW 224
Animal Law Seminar

An introduction to legal principles affecting animals and their use. 
LAW 225
Marital Property

Covers the California community property system, including the rights of marital and domestic partners during the ongoing relationship, and upon the end of the relationship by death or divorce. 
LAW 226
Disability Rights Law

Examines disability law and theory. Devoted to the Americans with Disabilities Act (particularly Titles I, II, and III) as it applies to employment, education, public accommodations, and government services and programs.
LAW 226ET
Mental Disability Law

Examine the civil and constitutional bases of mental disability law, as well as its history, and explore the role of mental disability in the policing and criminal trial process.
LAW 227A
Crimiminal Procedure

Federal constitutional limits on government authority to gather evidence and investigate crime. Topics include Fourth Amendment limits on search, seizure, and arrest; the Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination; and the Sixth Amendment right to counsel.
LAW 227B
Advanced Criminal Procedure 

Examines a range of issues, including bail, charging decisions, preliminary hearings, discovery, statute of limitations, venue, joinder and severance, pleas, plea bargaining, assistance of counsel, trial, double jeopardy, sentencing, appeal and collateral remedies.
LAW 227C
Topics in California Criminal Practice

Advanced criminal law and procedure class aimed at students planning to practice criminal law in California, either as an extern or summer clerk, or after graduation.  
LAW 228B
Accounting  for Lawyers

Exposure to basic principles of accounting, from the perspective of the practicing attorney.
LAW 228C
Law & Statistics

Introduction to fundamentals of statistical analysis and how statistical analysis is used in the law and public policy. Goal is to assist in becoming excellent consumers of statistical information and evidence.
LAW 230A
Wine & the Law

Surveys the legal landscape of this multi-billion dollar industry, focusing on contemporary debates and developments in judicial, legislative, and administrative arenas.
LAW 230T
Free Trade & the Environment

Examines the relationship between legal rules relating to trade and rules for the protection of the environment.   
LAW 231
Sex Based Discrimination

Issues raised by legal and social distinctions between men and women. Explores potential remedies for discrimination drawn from constitutional law, statutory enactments, and common law developments. Subject matter areas include sex-based discrimination in constitutional law, family law, reproductive rights, educational
LAW 231A
Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity, & the Law

Examines the legal and social regulation of sexual orientation and gender identity.  
LAW 232
Real Estate Finance

Examination of the problems involved in the acquisition, financing, and development of real estate, and of lender remedies and debtor protections in the event of debtor default. Stresses the practical application of California legal doctrines.
LAW 232AT
Real Estate Transactions

Review of legal issues in the purchase, sale, financing of residential real estate in US, with non-exclusive focus on California. Roles of parties involved, mechanisms of financing and security, survey of remedies, and role of mortgage lending beginning in 2008.
LAW 232T
Property Law & Race

Seminar explores the extent to which property law (common law, federal, state, and local statutes, and administration regulations) historically impacted and currently shapes conceptions of race, racial groups, and racial relations. 
LAW 233
Asylum & Refugee Law

Surveys U.S. and international law concerning refugees and asylum-seekers. Questions the meaning of persecution, the definition of "particular social groups" in U.S. law, protections for gender-related violence, statutory bars to asylum, and U.S. refugee policy.
LAW 233B
A Comparative Study of Forced Migration

Compares the Central American and Venezuelan forced migration phenomena in the Americas through the lens of history, politics, law, and morality. Considers the push and pull factors of forced migration from each nation and attempt to contextualize these factors within a broader understanding of history and modern politics.
LAW 234
Drug Law & Policy

Engage with the wide variety of policy and legal issues presented in the area of drug law and policy with a particular focus on one of the fastest-evolving fields in drug policy: marijuana law and policy.
LAW 235
Administrative Law

Examines how the U.S. Constitution and the federal Administrative Procedure Act constrain and regulate decision making by government agencies and officials. 
LAW 235B
Counseling & Legal Strategy in the Digital Age

Explores the complex challenges that entrepreneurs, businesses, and other organizations face when trying to address legal issues relating to technology. Approach is both practical and multidisciplinary. Encourages exploring the roles of a wide range of stakeholders (including lawyers, policy advocates and policymakers, businesspersons, and technologists) in developing legal and business strategies.
LAW 236C
Securities Enforcement

Examines the civil and criminal enforcement of the securities laws by both the Securities and Exchange Commission and Justice Department. Surveys the administrative rules and investigative procedures that govern the SEC and the substantive related crimes.
LAW 237
Legal History

Traces the development of the common law from its origins in medieval England through the 20th century.   
LAW 237B
Special Topics in Legal Theory: Ancient Athenian Law

Athenian legal system was different from our own and was far less formal. How did it work? Why did it work? Why have political and legal theorists misunderstood Athens for so long and what can we learn from that failure?
LAW 239
Mediation

Interactive focus on attorney representation of clients in mediation. 
LAW 240
Reforming Campaign Finance Law & the Initiative Process

Recent elections exposed many campaign finance and initiative issues. Focuses on reforms as well as current law.
LAW 240A
Law of the Political Process

Covers many of the foundational issues in the "law of democracy," as that body of statutory and constitutional law has developed in the United States.  
LAW 241
Voting Rights Seminar

Seminar investigates the right to vote as a matter of constitutional and statutory law, with emphasis on the voting rights of racial and ethnic minorities.
LAW 242
Conflict of Laws

Study of how law operates across state and national borders. Topics include choice of applicable law in transactions involving multiple jurisdictions, recognition of judgments, and the exercise of jurisdiction.   
LAW 242S
Special Session Conflict of Laws

Study of transactions with multi-state and international contracts.  Topics include jurisdiction, recognition of foreign judgments, and choice of applicable law.  Addresses problems that international lawyers encounter in a wide variety of deals with the emphasis on international commercial deals.
LAW 243
Commercial & Bankruptcy Law

Remedies available to creditors to force payment, along with devices that creditors may use to give themselves priority against limited assets. Bankruptcy both as a means for providing funds for creditors and as a device for maximizing asset value.
LAW 243A
Secured Transactions

Covers secured transactions (where a lender takes an interest in the debtor’s property as “collateral,” or security, for repayment of a loan) in personal property, such as auto loans and bank loans against business inventory. 
LAW 243B
Bankruptcy

Introduction to essentials of U.S. law governing bankruptcy of consumers and businesses. Addresses bankruptcy under Chapter 7, Chapter 11, and Chapter 13.
LAW 243C
Advanced Bankruptcy Practice: Corporate Reorganization

Corporate chapter 11 bankruptcy under the Federal Bankruptcy Code and alternatives to corporate bankruptcy. Selection of venue. Formation of strategic objectives. Analysis of different professionals’ roles.
LAW 245
Corporate & White Collar Crime

Covers the law of conspiracy, corporate criminal liability, mail & wire fraud, the Hobbs Act, RICO, money laundering, obstruction of justice, and other white collar crimes and their associated defenses.
LAW 245B
Death Penalty Seminar

Offers overview of the constitutional law governing the death penalty in the United States. 
LAW 247B
Corporate Tax

Examination of the federal income tax relationship between corporations and their owners. Covers the transfer of funds into a corporation on formation and the re-transfer of money and property from the corporation to its shareholders. 
LAW 248
Public International Law

Introductory course covers basic international law concepts and the law-making process. 
LAW 248A
Jurisdiction in Cyberspace Seminar 

Review concepts in international law, conflicts of law, cyberlaw, and federal jurisdiction to address the growing multi-jurisdictional conflicts created by the Internet. Examine European efforts at crafting intra-Europe jurisdictional rules, as well as other international jurisdiction treaty projects such as
LAW 248B
International Human Rights 

Introduces international human rights legal system through an examination of its historical origins and precursors and a review of its international legal backdrop, including the character and sources of international law, the UN Charter and the UN system. 
LAW 248C
Business & Human Rights

Explores the human rights responsibilities of businesses from legal, ethical, historical, and comparative perspectives. Equips students with the tools to be sensitive to human rights considerations as legal practitioners or in other fields of endeavor.
LAW 248D
Globalization & the Law 

Globalization of people, finance, goods, services, and information puts pressure on the nation-state form. In a world of diasporas and multinational corporations, what does citizenship mean?
LAW 248ET
Transitional Justice & Memory Politics in the Asia-Pacific

Transitional justice (legal responses to wrongdoings of repressive predecessor regimes) can help resolve “memory politics” that plague the relations and societies of many Asia-Pacific states. Examine relevant roles of governments, novel institutions, the judiciary, and civil society.
LAW 248T
Advanced International Law

Review books of international law; Hugo Grotius and Judge Rosalyn Higgins. Themes include peaceful resolutions of dispute, law of war and peace, and international legal process.
LAW 248TA
Human Rights in Post Soviet Central Asia: Legal Tools For Repression & Redress

Provides a historical context for the current political and human rights situation in Central Asia.  
LAW 248TC
International Economics Law 

Examine the architecture of the international economic system, with a focus on both trade and investment.  
LAW 248TT
Theories of International Law

International law, once critiqued as powerless and ineffective, is now challenged as a threat to American democracy. Introduction to competing theories of international law, including natural law, positivism, realism, liberalism, constructivism, fairness, legal process, and world public order. 
LAW 249
Comparative Law

Uses of comparative method, principal differences between common law and civil law and the styles of legal reasoning that prevail in these two great legal cultures. Topics include the evolution of the civil law, the phenomenon of codification, the structure of European civil codes and the interpretation of their provisions, the respective roles of counsel, judges and law teachers, civil law procedure, and the analysis of selected areas of substantive law. Knowledge of a foreign language is not required.
LAW 249S
Special Session Comparative Law

Provides a comparative perspective of American law. After an initial look at the uses of the comparative method, discussions is centered around the main differences between common law and civil law and the different styles of legal thinking. Topics to be covered are the evolution of the civil law & the idea of codification, the structure of European civil codes & the interpretation of their provisions, the personnel of the law & procedure in civil law countries, and the analysis of selected problems of substantive law. Knowledge of a foreign language not required.
LAW 250
Jurisprudence Seminar

Deals principally with the question of how judges should decide "hard cases," where the content of the law is in doubt and competent arguments have or could be offered for mutually inconsistent decisions in favor of either party. 
LAW 250A
Aoki Legal Scholarship Seminar

For students participating in the Aoki Center for Race and Nation Studies’ Immigration Law Journal. Research, and write a note on a topic related to immigration. Expectation is production of papers of publishable quality.
LAW 250B
Writing Requirement Workshop

Second- and third-year students produce a piece of academic writing that satisfies the King Hall writing requirement and is of publishable quality. Receive feedback both from the instructor and from one another in a workshop setting.
LAW 250T
Asian American Jurisprudence

Legal, social, and political discourse on race relations has traditionally been framed in Black-White terms. Disrupts the traditional view by taking Asian Americans seriously.
LAW 251
Labor Law

Survey of the legislative, administrative, and judicial regulation of labor relations under federal law. Historical development of labor law, the scope of national legislation, unions, strikes, picketing, and collective bargaining agreements.
LAW 251T
Labor Law I

Survey of the legislative, administrative, and judicial regulation of labor relations under federal law.
LAW 252
International Litigation & Arbitration

Current developments in international law, conflict of laws, civil procedure, arbitration, and comparative law in the context of transactions and disputes that cut across national boundaries.
LAW 253
Policy Advocacy

In-depth examination of the legislative process both within the California Legislature and from the advocates’ perspective. Train in key policy advocacy skills by legislative leaders and social justice advocates.
LAW 253A
Community Lawyering

Study the need for community lawyering including the structural inequalities and privileges embedded in the legal system and society. Skills necessary for community lawyering as well as sites and models for practice will be examined.
LAW 254
Housing Law 

Survey course covers legal and policy issues related to developing, protecting and preserving affordable, safe and accessible housing and sustaining viable, diverse communities.
LAW 254A
White Working Class & the Law

Considers the social, cultural, economic, and legal situation of low-income and/or low-education whites in contemporary U.S. society. 
LAW 254B
Access to Justice

Study of a variety of barriers that impede the access of unrepresented litigants to the courts--including poverty, racial bias, limited English proficiency and the digital divide--and critically examine existing solutions. Opportunity to develop and propose student's own solution to an access barrier.
LAW 254T
Practicum in Rural Community Advocacy

Provides an opportunity to learn about Participatory Action Research (PAR) methods and community-­based lawyering in the context of rural community development and advocacy. Using these skills and knowledge to serve rural California communities.    
LAW 255
Pension & Employee Benefits Law

Federal regulation and taxation of private pensions and employee benefits. Covers the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) and Internal Revenue Code issues.
LAW 256
Land Use

Local agencies, developers, environmental interest groups, and others who regularly deal with the administrative and legislative applications of land use planning and development laws. Topics include zoning, general plans, local government land use regulation, and related areas of litigation. Expanding role of the California Environmental Quality Act.
LAW 257
Legislative Process

Fundamental elements of the legislative process, including legislative procedure; the legislature as an institution; lobbying; statutory interpretation, legislative-executive relations; and the legislature's constitutional powers and limitations.
LAW 257A
Legislative Intent Seminar

Theories and principles of statutory and constitutional interpretation. Original intent vs. living constitution; permissible kinds of evidence for determining legislative intent; canons of construction; extent to which initiatives should be interpreted similarly to legislative enactments.
LAW 257B
Statutory Interpretation

Elective course for Environmental Law Certificate Program. Provides an introduction to the theory and practice of statutory interpretation.
LAW 257C
Applied Statutory Interpretation: California’s Housing-Framework Legislation

Theory and practice of statutory interpretation, taught using California statutes that address local barriers to housing supply. Writing intensive. 
LAW 258
Professional Responsibility

The ABA's Model Rules of Professional Conduct and the Code of Judicial Conduct, which are tested on the MPRE, and the California Rules of Professional Conduct, which are tested on the California Bar Examination. 
LAW 258
Professional Responsibility

The ABA's Model Rules of Professional Conduct and the Code of Judicial Conduct, which are tested on the MPRE, and the California Rules of Professional Conduct, which are tested on the California Bar Examination. 
LAW 258A
Legal Ethics & Corporate Practice

Focus on corporate practice to explore the ethical responsibilities of lawyers. 
LAW 258B
Mindfulness & the Law

Reviews the American Bar Association's Model Rules of Professional Conduct and the Code of Judicial Conduct, as tested on the Multistate Professional Responsibility Examination, and  covers California Rules of Professional Conduct, which are tested on the California Bar Examination.
LAW 258CT
The Business of Lawyering

Desired outcome is a thorough understanding of the business side of law practice and to promote an understanding of the relationship and balance between legal skills, business requirements of a practice, client needs and a work-life balance.
LAW 258DT
Setting Up & Maintaining Solo Law Practice

Introduction/overview of how to start a successful solo practice.
LAW 258E
Utility of Law School & Careers in the Law

Despite improvements in the economy, some observers continue to question whether law school is a viable option for college graduates. Considers the controversy and expose students to the variety of careers in the legal profession.
LAW 258F
Practice Ready Seminar

Includes a discussion and review of the role of the junior attorney within a law firm/legal department, professional goal-setting, strategies for effective communication and work within teams, delegation and resource management, organization and time management, an introduction to common junior-level assignments and how to complete them efficiently and effectively, building a professional network, and an introduction to business development, among other topics.
LAW 258G
Business Fundamentals for Lawyers

Surveys accounting and financial statements, basic financial concepts (e.g., time value of money), business valuation, capital markets, and major transaction types. Should help with other business law courses and be useful for communicating with business clients.
LAW 259
Feminist Legal Theory

Provides an overview of feminist legal theory and considers how its various strands inform legislative and judicial law making. Satisfies Advanced Writing Requirement.
LAW 259A
Women, Islam & the Law

Study legal and religious reform movements for women's rights within Muslim communities in the context of current scholarly and political debates about fundamentalism, democracy, equality, secularism, universalism, and multiculturalism.
LAW 259B
Women's Human Rights

Overview of international legal and institutional system for the protection of women’s human rights from an academic perspective and the view of the practitioner. Includes the (CEDAW), violence against women, sexual and reproductive rights, economic rights, and more.
LAW 260
Employment Discrimination

Examine federal laws prohibiting employment discrimination, including Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Equal Pay Act, the Age Discrimination in Employment Act, the Americans with Disabilities Act, the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, and § 1981. 
LAW 260A
Employment Law

Provides an overview of employment law, labor law and employment discrimination law and aims to serve as a foundation for understanding the law and policy (statutory and common law) that surround the employer-employee relationship.   
LAW 261
Judicial Process

Examines a variety of issues concerning the judicial process. Focus is on judge's role in the legal process, the administration of justice, ethical issues, decision making, bias, and critical examination of the strengths and weaknesses in our current judicial system.
LAW 262
Antitrust

Focus on the federal antitrust laws, concentrating on basic substantive areas of the Sherman and Clayton Acts.    
LAW 262AT
US Antitrust Law & Indian Competition Law: A Comparative Perspective

Fundamental principles of Indian Competition Law and US Antitrust Law in a comparative perspective. Helps American students, interested in future corporate law careers, to develop effective strategies for better managing cross border deals in India.
LAW 262B
Regulated Industries

Examines regulation of business in sectors, traditionally described as “common carrier” and “utility” industries, where because of market failures normal competitive mechanism will not protect consumers from exercises of market power. 
LAW 262C
Antitrust & Intellectual Property

Explores the challenges antitrust law faces in protecting the innovation incentives of dynamic technology-led market competition, motivating and incentivizing companies to innovate and allowing them to retain the profits of such market growth.
LAW 262S
Special Session Antitrust

A study of the federal antitrust laws including price fixing, limits on distribution, tying arrangements, monopolization and mergers.
LAW 263
Criminal Trials: Theory & Practice

Trial advocacy course centered on client relationship building, preparation for trial, and courtroom practice.
LAW 264
Water Law

Property rights in surface waters, including riparian rights, prior appropriation, and public rights use of water bodies; environmental constraints on exercise of water rights; groundwater rights and management; federal allocation and control of water resources; legal aspects of interstate allocation.
LAW 264A
Ocean & Coastal Law

Introduction to the goals and challenges of coastal and ocean policy; the complicated web of public and private interests in coastal lands and ocean waters; regulation of coastal development; domestic and international fisheries management; and preservation of ocean resources.
LAW 266
Commercial Law

This course will concentrate primarily on the law of sales.  A functional approach will be adopted towards the Uniform Commercial Code and Article 2 on sales.  Discussion will include, among other topics, the nature of a sales "bargain," the allocation of the risk between the parties, the legal significance of sales warranties and disclaimers, performance, nonperformance and breach.  The purpose throughout will be 
LAW 266A
Cyberlaw

Emerging legal issues crucial to the conduct of business in cyberspace. Discussion of the evolution and current administration of the Internet and the World Wide Web. 
LAW 267
Civil Rights Law

Civil remedies for civil rights violations under the primary United States civil rights statute. Specifically, covers actions for constitutional and statutory violations under 42 USC §1983, affirmative defenses, and abstention doctrines. 
LAW 267B
Civil Rights Seminar

Social, political, legal and historical factors which led to the creation of the United States Commission on Civil Rights (USCCR) in 1957. The United States Commission on Civil Rights is a bipartisan, independent agency established by the Civil Rights Act. It is directed to investigate complaints alleging deprivations of the right to vote, and voter fraud; to study and collect information relating to discrimination and the denial of equal protection of the laws under the Constitution on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, age, disability, or national origin; and submit reports, findings and recommendations to the President and to Congress. The role that the USCCR has played and continues to play in American politics, legislative enactments and the national dialogue on equality, fairness and justice in the context of civil and human rights. Satisfies Advanced Legal Writing Requirement. 
LAW 268T
Suing the Government: Civil Rights, Torts, Takings, & More

Explores the basic requirements of suing government, including sovereign immunity, particular schemes for litigating against government (Federal Tort Claims Act, APA, False Claims Act, etc.), direct constitutional claims and the procedural pitfalls and remedies available against government.
LAW 269AT
The Financial Crisis: Law & Policy & Inequality

Examines the regulation of financial intermediaries. Stated goal of regulation is to ensure systemic stability and to pursue consumer protection. Question asked whether there is an imbalance between systematic stability and consumer protection before the crisis of 2008.
LAW 269B
Consumer Protection & Financial Regulation

Examines efforts to ensure a “fair” financial marketplace, focusing on the 2010 Dodd-Frank Act and its creation of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau and regimes enacted to protect consumers.
LAW 269D
Seminar on Financial Regulation

Introduction to the legal and regulatory issues presented by contemporary capital markets. 
LAW 269E
Public Finance

Introduction to the basic concepts of public finance, the underlying law governing public finance: in particular state law, federal tax law and federal securities law. 
LAW 270
International Business Transactions

Select legal problems arising from international business transactions. 
LAW 270B
Technology Transactions

Practical overview of technology transactions, including licensing. In addition to substantive lectures, instruction via hypotheticals and scenarios to illustrate key issues in these transactions, drafting exercises, negotiation exercises, and group presentation exercises.
LAW 270S
Special Session International Business Transactions

A consideration of select legal problems arising from international business transactions.  Topics include the international sales contract, letters of credit, transfers of technology, regulation of bribery, repatriation of profits, and national efforts to control imports.
LAW 271T
Nonprofit Organizations-Key Legal Topics

Legal issues raised in operating and governing a nonprofit organization, primarily a public charity. 
LAW 272
Family Law

An introduction to the legal regulation of the family.
LAW 272
Family Law

An introduction to the legal regulation of the family.
LAW 273A
Education Policy & the Law

Topics include civil rights, inequality and the "right" to an education, bilingual education, school finance litigation, educational access, No Child Left Behind Act, Common Core Standards and charter schools. For students interested in educational policy and social regulatory policy.
LAW 273B
Special Education Law & Policy

Introduction to the law of special education including the Individuals with Disabilities in Education Act (IDEA), Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act, and federal regulations governing special education law. 
LAW 273BT
Special Education Law and Policy

Introduction to the law of special education including the Individuals with Disabilities in Education Act (IDEA), Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act, and federal regulations governing special education law.
LAW 273BT
Special Education Law & Policy

Introduction to the law of special education including the Individuals with Disabilities in Education Act (IDEA), Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act, and federal regulations governing special education law.
LAW 274
Intellectual Property

Provides a broad survey of intellectual property law.  
LAW 274A
International Intellectual Property & Development

Examines international trade law, national customs law, intermediary liability rules, claims for rights in traditional knowledge and genetic resources, protections for geographical indications, technology transfer, and intellectual property piracy.
LAW 274AS
Special Session Intellectual Property

Provides a broad survey of the field of intellectual property. Areas covered will include trademarks, patents, trade secrets, idea protection, unfair competition, and copyright.
LAW 274B
Trade Secrets

Examines effects of a burgeoning intellectual property regime on cultural conflict and formation. 
LAW 274B
Trade Secrets

Examines effects of a burgeoning intellectual property regime on cultural conflict and formation. 
LAW 274CT
Knowledge Commons, Collaborative Authorship, Open Access

Focuses on the increasingly global diffusion and success of collaborative forms of cultural and technoscientific production rooted in copyright-based licenses.
LAW 274D
Intellectual Property in Historical Context Seminar 

How the legal system has adapted to earlier periods of rapid change by creating, delimiting, and expanding intellectual property rights (IPRs). Required paper satisfies advanced writing requirement.
LAW 274ET
Intellectual Property, Human Rights & Social Justice

Examine the implications of copyright and patents for a broad set of social justice values, with particular emphasis on the interaction between intellectual property law and human rights law on the global stage.
LAW 274FT
Censorship in the Global Age

Examines from a globalized perspective a broad range of censorship issues, drawing from established cases and practices. This seminar attempts to identify a globally consistent set of theories that have gained traction in relevant regional or international debates.
LAW 274GT
Race, National Identity & Intellectual Properties

Drawing upon methods taken from critical race theory, critical/cultural studies, and rhetoric this course addresses the relationships between intellectual properties and processes racial/national identity formation in the US, particularly as exemplified in legal, popular cultural, and political texts.
LAW 274H
Theory & History of Intellectual Property

Seminar traces development of intellectual property law in the U.S. and Europe because it is not possible to understand the logic and shape of current Intellectual Property concepts outside of their messy history.  
LAW 275
Complex Litigation in a Civil Rights Context

Study of the issues that frequently arise in large complex litigation involving multiple parties and multiple claims.
LAW 276
Juvenile Justice Process

Legal and philosophical bases of a separate juvenile justice process for crimes committed by minors. The role of counsel at each phase of the process is examined.
LAW 277
Federal Indian Law

Focuses on legal relations between Native American tribes and the federal and state governments.  
LAW 277A
Tribal Justice

Examines the administration of justice within tribal governments and courts and the efforts of advocates to achieve justice for tribes through litigation, policy advocacy, public education, organizing, and inter-governmental collaboration.
LAW 277T
Indian Gaming Law Seminar

Examines unique historical, political and legal context in which Indian tribes operate casinos, including impacts on tribal sovereignty, relations between tribes, states and local governments and changing relationships among the tribes themselves members, with particular reference to experience of California.
LAW 278
Pretrial Skills

Uses role-playing exercises, videotaped simulations, and related projects to introduce students to lawyering skills basic to the practice of law, including client interviewing, witness interviewing and discovery, including depositions.
LAW 281
State and Local Government Law 

Topics include: federalism, relations between states and localities, governmental liability, zoning, educational equity, and public finance. Readings will be drawn not only from case law and statues, but from history, theory and public policy.
LAW 281
State & Local Government Law

Topics include: federalism, relations between states & localities, governmental liability, zoning, educational equity, and public finance. Readings drawn not only from case law and statues, but from history, theory and public policy.
LAW 282
Energy Law Seminar

The history, law, and public policy of energy regulation in the United States with an emphasis on economic and environmental regulation.explored. Recommended to anyone who has an interest in the energy sector, various models of economic regulation, or regulated industries.
LAW 282A
Renewable Energy Seminar

Provides a broad overview of renewable energy law and policy with a particular focus on the California policy context. Topics include renewable electricity, California’s renewable portfolio standard, and project development.
LAW 283
Remedies

Survey of modern American civil remedies law in both private and public law contexts. Topics include equitable remedies, equitable defenses, contempt power, injunctive relief, restitution, and money damages in torts and contracts.
LAW 283
Remedies

Survey of modern American civil remedies law in both private and public law contexts. Topics include equitable remedies, equitable defenses, contempt power, injunctive relief, restitution, and money damages in torts and contracts.
LAW 284
Law & Economics

Introduction to the economic analysis of law. Prior study of economics is not required.
LAW 285
Environmental Law

Introduction to environmental law, focusing primarily on federal law. 
LAW 285A
California Environmental Issues

The "Nation-state" of California has for many years been a national and global leader in environmental law and policy. Survey of key California environmental law and policy issues.  
LAW 285BT
Food Justice

Focus on the law and policy of the emerging "food justice movement," which combines the goals and principles of the environmental justice movement with some of the policy initiatives involved in "ethical consumption" and "sustainable agriculture" movements. 
LAW 285C
Food & Agricultural Law

Introduction to agricultural law, focusing on legal principles and issues at the forefront of contemporary debates about agriculture in society.
LAW 285C
Food Systems Law & the Environment

Explores the various legal structures surrounding the governance of our food system; we will cover environmental regulation (or lack thereof), food safety laws, trade laws, and labor laws. 
LAW 285D
Farmworkers and the Law

Provides an overview of California and federal laws impacting farmworkers and how such laws have been applied to regulate working conditions in agriculture. 
LAW 285D
Farmworkers & the Law

Provides an overview of California and federal laws impacting farmworkers and how such laws have been applied to regulate working conditions in agriculture. 
LAW 285E
Climate Change Law & Policy

Addresses the legal and public policy dimensions of climate change, perhaps the most important environmental issue of our time.  
LAW 285F
Environmental Justice 

Introduction to the field of environmental justice. 
LAW 285G
Environmental Law Seminar: Emerging Technologies & the Environment

Examines legal regimes that might apply to various emerging technologies and consider governance mechanisms and reforms that might enable more foresighted and participatory development and management of technology.
LAW 285H
Comparative Environmental Law

Focus on Pacific Rim, examining factors, similarities/differences in countries environmental regulation and success of environmental law. Including information and market-based regulatory approaches; compliance and enforcement gaps; citizen and community mobilization; the role of legal institutions; variations in regulatory style.   
LAW 285TA
Environmental Law Seminar: Emerging Technologies & the Environment

Examines legal regimes that might apply to various emerging technologies and consider governance mechanisms and reforms that might enable more foresighted and participatory development and management of technology.
LAW 286
Health Care Law 

Addresses legal issues raised in general areas: access to health care and health care financing.  Course materials and discussion focus on both public and private aspects of these issue areas.  
LAW 286A
Topical Issues in Health Law

Focuses on four-six issues at the interface of law, medicine, bioethics, and health policy that are currently the subject of major litigation, legislation, and/or contentious debate in the domains of bioethics and public policy. 
LAW 286B
Public Health Law 

Public health law, seen broadly, is the government's power and responsibility to ensure the conditions for the population's health. 
LAW 286C
Bioethics 

Examines the ethical and legal issues that arise from biomedical research and use of medical technologies.  
LAW 286C
Bioethics 

Examines the ethical and legal issues that arise from biomedical research and use of medical technologies.  
LAW 286D
Legal Psychology Seminar

Examines how psychological theory and research can be used to shape laws and policies to make them better reflect what we know empirically about how individuals process information, make decisions and behave. 
LAW 286E
Reproductive Rights, Law, & Policy

Addresses a variety of laws and practices that affect reproductive health and procreative decision making.  
LAW 287
Public Land Law

Legal aspects of federal land management, including the history of public land law, the scope of federal and state authority over the federal lands, and the allocation of public land resources among competing uses.
LAW 287A
Poverty Law

Explore the theory and practice of law pertaining to the enactment and enforcement of laws regulating or aiding the poor and other disadvantaged persons.  
LAW 287T
Law & Society Seminar

Study of law and society challenges traditional legal scholarship by exploring multiple ways in which law both shapes and is shaped by societies and social interactions. Seminar introduction to important literature and debates in the field. 
LAW 288A
Presidential Powers Seminar

Explores the Constitutional powers of the President in Article II and how they intersect with Congressional power. Emphasis on executive and legislative power, executive orders, appointment and removal powers, executive privilege and immunity, pardons,impeachment, Congressional investigations, independent and special counsels, and the 25th Amendment.
LAW 288B
Supreme Court Simulation Seminar

Take on the role of Justices of, and advocates before, the Supreme Court of the United States.
LAW 289A
Biotechnology Law & Policy

Coverage includes the regulation of biotechnology research, including restrictions on cloning and fetal stem cell research; regulation of the products of biotechnology to protect human health or the environment, including restrictions on use or distribution of geneti-als for biotechnology and trade in bioengineered organisms or their products.
LAW 290
International Trade Dispute Seminar

The WTO and other regional trading agreements, particularly the NAFTA, provide mechanisms for resolution of trade disputes.  Introduction to economic, political, and legal theories underlying establishment of such bodies.
LAW 290AT
Privacy, Surveillance, & “Sousveillance” 

Issues of privacy and surveillance are important to businesses, governments and citizens. Surveillance raises issues of autonomy and the abuse of power. “Sousveillance,” (citizen holds the camera), is a mechanism for rooting out corruption and exposing individuals to societal scrutiny.
LAW 290BT
Surveillance & States

Examines the tensions between democracy and the rise of government power entailed by the growth of state surveillance, United States surveillance law and practice, and surveillance law and practice across the world. Considers international legal constraints on government surveillance.
LAW 290T
International Trade Law

Review existing landscape of trade regulation from the World Trade Organizations, to regional organizations such as NAFTA, ASEAN, and the European Union.
LAW 291A
International Finance

Money makes the world go round.  We will try to follow that money, learning how a framework of national and international laws and institutions regulates (or perhaps fails to regulate) its flow. 
LAW 291B
International Investment Dispute Seminar

This seminar will examine the law of investor-State dispute resolution. 
LAW 291T
International Arbitration & Investment Law

Covers international arbitration involving States, individuals, and corporations; including: the parties; the agreement to arbitrate; the arbitrators; the arbitral proceeding; and, the arbitral award.
LAW 292
Immigration Law & Procedure

Surveys the history of U.S. immigration law and policy.
LAW 293
Public Interest Law

This class will examine the issues and problems associated with providing civil legal services to persons and interests in American society that typically have been unable to afford or otherwise obtain representation from the private bar.
LAW 293AT
Contemporary Issues in Economic Justice

Provides an introduction to the social justice critique of free markets.   
LAW 294A
Law & Popular Culture

Examines works of popular culture, films, and legal texts. Each session focuses on a particular film and its cultural implications, particular problem or problems of law, law practice, legal ethics, traditional ethics, or public policy.
LAW 294B
Video Game Law

Focuses primarily on intellectual property law through the lens of video game-related litigation, and addresses the ways in which video games and the video game industry shape law and society. Addresses the video game business, the structure and form of video-game-related legal transactions, and other current legal issues surrounding video games.
LAW 295B
University Brands

Universities gain from developing brands, to draw donors and students and lend prestige to a range of activities – merchandise, publishing, technology transfer, continuing education, hospitals, distance learning, etc. Whether private, public, elitist, or inclusive, the university can no longer avoid to brand itself. Discusses the role of trademarks in the university and changes affecting it.
LAW 295T
Brands

Takes a close, interdisciplinary look at branding. Preparation to understand modern branding strategies and the challenges such strategies may pose to traditional trademark law and policy. Topics include merchandising rights, unfair competition, and counterfeits.
LAW 296
Copyright

Thorough examination of the law of copyright, including its application to literature, music, films, television, art, computer programs, and the Internet.
LAW 296B
Entertainment Law

Provides a working knowledge of legal issues in the entertainment industry with general and more specialized knowledge in established media, including film, literature, music and television, as well as emerging online media and video games.
LAW 296C
Fictional Characters & Real People

Celebrities and fictional characters both have a powerful hold on the human imagination and are important parts of our modern myths. Examines legal protection available for each.  
LAW 296D
Art Law

Selected issues in Art Law, including meaning of art, how to represent artists, copyright, publicity, first amendment rights, censorship, street art, government regulation, art markets, international protection of art and cultural property; and more.
LAW 296T
Entertainment Law 

Explores the many facets of Entertainment Law.
LAW 296T
Entertainment Law 

Explores the many facets of Entertainment Law.
LAW 297
Alternative Dispute Resolution

Introduction to a wide variety of alternative dispute resolution procedures, with an emphasis on negotiation, mediation and arbitration.
LAW 297A
Federal Arbitration Act Seminar

Trace the development of commercial arbitration law, with a special emphasis on hot-button contemporary issues like consumer and employment arbitration, the separability doctrine, preemption of state law, and the arbitrability of statutory claims.  
LAW 297BT
International Commercial Arbitration

International commercial arbitration, Convention on International Sale of Goods, general understanding of international arbitration provided by World Bank's International Centre for Settlement of Investor-State Disputes under Convention on Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States.
LAW 298
Sociology of the Legal Profession Seminar

Comprehensive look at the organization, operation, and ideology of the legal profession.
LAW 400A
Study Abroad: University College Dublin, Ireland 

Semester away study abroad at the University College Dublin, Ireland. Enhance knowledge of international legal regimes and obtain a global legal educational experience. Taught abroad.
LAW 400B
Study Abroad: University of Cophengen, Denmark

Semester study abroad at the University of Copenhagen, Denmark. Enhance knowledge of international legal regimes and obtain a global legal educational experience. Taught abroad.
LAW 400C
Study Abroad: China University of Political Science & Law 

Semester-away study abroad at the China University of Political Science and Law. Enhance knowledge of international legal regimes and obtain a global legal educational experience. Taught abroad.
LAW 400D
Study Abroad: University of Lausanne, Switzerland

Semester-away study abroad at the University of Lausanne, Switzerland. Enhance knowledge of international legal regimes and obtain a global legal educational experience. Taught abroad.
LAW 400E
Study Abroad: Comillas Pontifical University Madrid, Spain

Semester-away study abroad at the Comillas Pontifical University in Madrid, Spain. Enhance knowledge of international legal regimes and obtain a global legal educational experience. Taught abroad.
LAW 400F
Study Abroad: Université Paris Nanterre, Paris

Semester-away study abroad at the  Universite Paris Nanterre, Paris. Enhance knowledge of international legal regimes and obtain a global legal educational experience. Taught abroad.
LAW 400S
Critical Topics in Environmental Law in a Comparative Perspective

Intensive,  two-week  program  provides an opportunity for U.S. and  international law students to study environmental law by examining and comparing European Union and U.S. environmental law policies and regulatory regimes. 
LAW 408
Community Education Seminar

Trains students to educate the community about basic legal rights and responsibilities. Students attend an initial four-hour orientation,followed by weekly seminars that will prepare students to teach in a local high school at least two times per week. 
LAW 409
Environmental Law Moot Court

During the first eight weeks of fall semester, students research and submit briefs as appellants, respondents, or third parties on a problem of environmental law that is prepared by the National Environmental Law Moot Court Board. 
LAW 410A
Appellate Advocacy I

Basic appellate practice and procedure. Beginning instruction in oral advocacy skills and an opportunity to practice these skills in front of a moot court.
LAW 410B
Appellate Advocacy II  (Moot Court) 

Continuation of LAW 410A. Focuses on the development of effective appellate brief writing skills and the refinement of oral advocacy skills.
LAW 411
Journal of International Law & Policy 

The Journal is a biannual journal produced by King Hall students with an interest in international law. The editor-in-chief of the journal receives 2 units of credit each semester; managing editor receives 1 unit of credit each semester.
LAW 411
Journal of International Law & Policy 

The Journal is a biannual journal produced by King Hall students with an interest in international law. The editor-in-chief of the journal receives 2 units of credit each semester; managing editor receives 1 unit of credit each semester.
LAW 411A
Journal of International Law & Policy

The UC Davis Journal of International Law & Policy publishes semi-annually and strives to contribute pertinent and interesting scholarly works to the field of international law.
LAW 411B
Journal of Juvenile Law & Policy 

The Journal of Juvenile Law & Policy is a biannual publication of the UC Davis School of Law that addresses the unique concerns of youth in the American legal system.
LAW 411B
Social Justice Law Review

The Social Justice Law Review is a publication of the UC Davis School of Law that addresses the unique concerns of social justice in the American legal system.
LAW 411C
UC Davis Business Law Journal

The UC Davis Business Law Journal is run by dedicated law students who are committed to providing current and valuable legal and business analysis. 
LAW 412
Carr Intraschool Trial Advocacy Competition

Named after the late Justice Frances Carr, this competition is open to secondand third-year students. A preliminary round is followed by quarter-finals,semi-finals,and a final round. Students participate in mock trials presided over by judges and critiqued by experienced litigators. 
LAW 415
Trial Practice Honors Board

Members of the Trial Practice Honors Board administer the Frances Carr competition. Members are nominated by their individual Trial Practice I adjuncts.
LAW 416
Law Review Writer

Writing of a law review article under the editorial supervision of editors of the UC Davis Law Review. Office hours (including but not limited to Bluebooking and cite-checking) are required. 1 or 2 units.
LAW 418
Environmental Law & Policy Journal

Environs is a biannual environmental law and policy journal that provides an open forum for the discussion of current environmental issues, particularly those pertaining to the state of California.
LAW 419
Advanced Writing Project

Completion of a writing requirement project under the active and regular supervision of a faculty member in satisfaction of the legal writing requirement. Writing project must be an individually authored work of rigorous intellectual effort of at least 20 typewritten double-spaced pages, excluding footnotes. Project may take any of several forms, for example, a paper, a brief, a memorandum of law, a proposed statute, a statutory scheme or set of administrative regulations (with explanatory comments), or a will or agreement (with explanatory comments). Advanced writing project may also be undertaken in connection with another course or seminar to satisfy the legal writing requirements. Number of units shall be approved by the faculty supervisor and will depend upon the scope of the writing effort. 
LAW 419A
Advanced Writing Project

Completion of a writing requirement project under the active and regular supervision of a faculty member in satisfaction of the legal writing requirement. Writing project must be an individually authored work of rigorous intellectual effort of at least 20 typewritten double-spaced pages, excluding footnotes. Project may take any of several forms, for example, a paper, a brief, a memorandum of law, a proposed statute, a statutory scheme or set of administrative regulations (with explanatory comments), or a will or agreement (with explanatory comments). Advanced writing project may also be undertaken in connection with another course or seminar to satisfy the legal writing requirements. Number of units shall be approved by the faculty supervisor and will depend upon the scope of the writing effort.
LAW 419S
Special Session Advanced Writing Project

Completion of a writing requirement project under the active and regular supervision of a faculty member in satisfaction of the legal writing requirement. Writing project must be an individually authored work of rigorous intellectual effort of at least 20 typewritten double-spaced pages, excluding footnotes. Project may take any of several forms, for example, a paper, a brief, a memorandum of law, a proposed statute, a statutory scheme or set of administrative regulations (with explanatory comments), or a will or agreement (with explanatory comments). Advanced writing project may also be undertaken in connection with another course or seminar to satisfy the legal writing requirements. Number of units shall be approved by the faculty supervisor and will depend upon the scope of the writing effort.
LAW 445B
Advanced Aoki Water Justice Clinic

The Advanced Aoki Water Justice Clinic allows students to leverage their legal research and practical lawyering skills to advance policies that ensure that low-income, California communities receive safe, clean, and affordable drinking water.
LAW 446
UC Davis Capital Law Scholars Externship Program

Program is designed to provide students with hands-on lawyering experience in a legislative office, with a legislative committee, or with a government/nonprofit office engaged in legislative and policy work. Grading is on a S/U basis.
LAW 446A
UC Davis Capital Law Scholars Seminar

May be required for students enrolled in Capital Law Scholars Externship. Covers issues related to lawyering in California’s state capital, and help students maximize educational and professional experience in their externship placements.
LAW 475
Washington UC-DC Law Program

Uniquely collaborative externship program in Washington, D.C., combining weekly seminars with full-time field placement offering students an unparalleled opportunity to learn how federal statutes, regulations, and policies are made, changed, and understood in the nation's capital. Taught in Washington, D.C.
LAW 475A
Law Making & Law Changing in the Nation's Capital 

Companion seminar to the Washington UC-DC Externship. Designed to enhance the externship experience in three principal ways. Taught in Washington, D.C.
LAW 485
California Supreme Court Clinic

California Supreme Court Clinic provides students with an immersive experience in litigating cases before the state’s highest court.  
LAW 490T
Aoki Federal Public Defender Clinic

Outgrowth of the work of the Aoki Center on Race and Nation. As part of its work, the Aoki Center provides educational opportunities to students interested in critical race perspectives in practice.  
LAW 499
Independent Research Project

Students may receive credit for individual projects, subject to the following regulations: (1) the project may extend over no more than two semesters; (2) each project will be under the supervision of a faculty member; (3) an outline of the project must be approved by the supervising faculty member; (4)normally, no faculty member will be permitted to supervise more than 5 students working on individual programs during any semester; and (5)each student must submit an individual paper or approved alternative to the supervising faculty member.
LAW 499A
Independent Research Project

Students may receive credit for individual projects, subject to the following regulations: (1)the project may extend over no more than two semesters; (2)each project will be under the supervision of a faculty member; (3) an outline of the project must be approved by the supervising faculty member; (4)normally, no faculty member will be permitted to supervise more than 5 students working on individual programs during any semester; and (5)each student must submit an individual paper or approved alternative to the supervising faculty member. Grading is on a Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory basis unless a request for letter grading has been made in advance.
LAW 499B
Law Students Study Away 

Students studying away from UC Davis, School of Law. Taught abroad or off campus.
LAW 499C
Joint Degree Student-GSM

Joint degree course for graduate School of Management students.
LAW 499S
Special Independent Research Project

Students may receive credit for individual projects, subject to the following regulations: (1) the project may extend over no more than two semesters; (2) each project will be under the supervision of a faculty member; (3) an outline of the
LAW 499SA
Special Session Independent Research Project

Students may receive credit for individual projects, subject to the following regulations: (1) the project may extend over no more than two semesters; (2) each project will be under the supervision of a faculty member; (3) an outline of the
LAW 499SB
Special Session Independent Research Project

Students may receive credit for individual projects, subject to the following regulations: (1) the project may extend over no more than two semesters; (2) each project will be under the supervision of a faculty member; (3) an outline of the project must be approved by the supervising faculty member; (4) normally, no faculty member will be permitted to supervise more than 5 students working on individual programs during any semester; and (5) each student must submit an individual paper or approved alternative to the supervising faculty member.
LDA 001
Introduction to Environmental Design

Introduction to the role of design professionals in contributing to the built environment at a range of scales. Introduction to basic methods used by design professionals to evaluate, design, plan, and manage landscapes and the built environment. 
LDA 002
Place, Culture & Community

Introduction to recognizing and reading cultural landscapes, and the application of cultural landscape meaning to  the creation of contemporary built environments. Topics include patterns and influences relating to agriculture, military, transportation, housing, wilderness, recreation and tourism.
LDA 003
Sustainable Development: Theory & Practice  

Origins, theoretical perspectives, and practical applications of the concept of sustainable development across scales (site,building, neighborhood, city, region, and nation) through lectures, sketch exercises, student projects, walking tours.
LDA 010
World Regional Geography

Major geographic regions of the world; physical and human geography of each region; interactions between the people and the environment; culture and landscape; major resources; physical environments; population distribution and major cities. 
LDA 030
History of Environmental Design

History of Environmental Design across disciplines, including landscape architecture, planning, community and urban design.
LDA 061
AutoCAD for Landscape Architects

Introduction of computer-aided drafting (CAD) techniques and their application to landscape design. Drawing set-up, layer control, basic drawing and editing commands, dimensioning and text styles, symbol libraries, and display commands used in the creation of landscape architectural drawings.
LDA 061
AutoCAD for Landscape Architects

Introduction of computer-aided drafting (CAD) techniques and their application to landscape design. Drawing set-up, layer control, basic drawing and editing commands, dimensioning and text styles, symbol libraries, and display commands used in the creation of landscape architectural drawings.
LDA 150
Introduction to Geographic Information Systems

Basic concepts, principles, and methods of GIS are presented. Data structures, database design, GIS data creation, GPS, and spatial analysis. May be taught abroad.
LDA 190
Proseminar in Landscape Architecture

Lectures and discussion of critical issues in landscape architecture.
LDA 202
Methods in Design & Landscape Research

Explores many of the research and advanced design and planning methods employed in landscape architecture. Exercises provide the student with a vehicle for designing independent landscape research and creative activities. Lectures provide an historical overview of research methodology.
LDA 205
Urban Planning & Design  

Regulation, design, and development of the built landscape, planning and land development processes, zoning and subdivision regulation, site planning, urban design goals and methods, public participation strategies, creatively designing landscapes to meet community and ecological goals.
LDA 215
Ecologies of Infrastructure

Focus on design practices and theory associated with ecological conceptions of infrastructure, including networked infrastructure, region, bioregion, regionalization, ecological engineering, reconciliation ecology, novel ecosystems, and theory/articulation of landscape change.
LDA 216
Food & the City

Exploration of theory and practice related to the design and planning of alternative and resilient food systems, including urban agriculture, agrihoods, and agri-/rural tourism. Includes investigation of urban-rural connections and case-studies of regional urban agriculture projects.
LDA 299
Directed Individual Research for Graduate Students


LDA 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum


LIN 001
Introduction to Linguistics

Introduction to the study of language; its nature, diversity, and structure.
LIN 001Y
Introduction to Linguistics

Introduction to the study of language; its nature, diversity, and structure.
LIN 003
Language & the Body

Perspectives on the role of language in issues about bodies. Language-related disabilities. Social implications of language use in discussing body-related conditions.
LIN 005
Global English & Communication

English as a global language and its uses in intercultural communication. Cultural, historical, and political dimensions of varieties of English spoken around the world. Experiential grounding in strategies for increasing interpretive and verbal communicative competence for a globalized world.
LIN 006
Language & Society

Language as a social phenomenon. Topics include linguistic diversity, language policy, language and identity, language and social structure, speech communities and social networks, the effect of social factors on language variation, linguistic consequences of language contact.
LIN 015
Academic Oral Communication

Structure of oral communication, critical thinking, and persuasion in classroom discourse in American English and in cross-cultural perspective.
LIN 165
Introduction to Applied Linguistics

Applications of linguistic principles and the analysis of language-related issues in the world.  Exploration of a range of language-related problems including issues related to language learning and teaching to issues concerning language and gender, race, class and the media.
LIN 182
Multilingualism

Issues in multilingualism from a global perspective: e.g., multilingual communities; multilingualism and identity (gender, ethnicity, nationality); language ideologies and educational and sociopolitical policies surrounding multilingualism; acquisition of multilingualism; discursive practices of multilinguals.
LIN 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates


LIN 201
Proseminar

Introduction to research activity of faculty in the Graduate Group in Linguistics and guest speakers.
LIN 250
Principles of Typological Linguistics

Cross-linguistic comparison and typology, including word order, morphological typology, complex clauses, semantic categories and their grammaticalization, and applications of typology to language acquisition.
LIN 253
Speech Perception

Investigation into how listeners map a continuous and variable acoustic signal to a linguistic interpretation. Phonetic context, variation, linguistic knowledge, and sociolinguistics as factors in perceiving speech.
LIN 265
Language, Performance, & Power

Exploration of the intersection between linguistic and social theories in the language-state relation and the performance of identity.  Ideological sources of language differentiation; nation-building and linguistic difference. Political economic, sociolinguistic, and ethnographic approaches to understanding linguistic inequality.
LIN 275
Neurobiology of Language

Survey of historical and modern conceptions of the neurobiology of language. Aphasia, functional neuroimaging, functional neuroanatomy of human language.
LIN 282
Individual & Social Aspects of Bilingualism

Broad overview of bi-and multilingualism, with focus on theoretical and descriptive research; topics covered range from language processing in bilinguals to code-switching to language as political issue in multilingual states.
LIN 283
Politics of Bi & Multilingual Literacies

Anthropological, psycho-social, political, and educational perspectives on bi- and multi-lingualism. Power, colonialism, "native/non-native" speakers, and varieties and the unequal distribution of social goods. Analysis of how competing factors keep peoples disenfranchised. 
LIN 299
Research


LTS 001
First Year Engagement: Student Success in Letters & Science 

Introduction to university life. Topics include transition to academic and campus life; academic expectations and the skills to meet them; campus resources; social and professional development; assistance in choice of major, and academic planning.
MAE 256
Sustainable Manufacturing & Design

Definitions, methods, and dimensions of sustainability in manufacturing and product design. Emphasis on resource efficiency and life cycle engineering in the context of the production environment. 
MAE 276
Data Acquisition & Analysis

Application of computers for data acquisition and control. Topics include computer architecture, characteristics of transducers, hardware for laboratory applications of computers, fundamentals of interfaces between computers and experimental equipment, programming techniques for data acquisition and control, basic data analysis.
MAE 298
Group Study


MAT 000B
Elementary Algebra (no credit)

Basic concepts of algebra, including polynomials, factoring, equations, graphs, and inequalities. Offered only if sufficient number of students enroll.
MAT 000C
Trigonometry (no credit)

Basic concepts of trigonometry, including trigonometric functions, identities, inverse functions, and applications. Offered only if sufficient number of students enroll. 
MAT 000D
Intermediate Algebra (no credit)

Basic concepts of algebra, prepares student for college work in mathematics, such as MAT 016A or MAT 021A. Functions, equations, graphs, logarithms, and systems of equations. Offered only if sufficient number of students enroll. 
MAT 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates


MAT 290
Seminar

Advanced study in various fields of mathematics, including analysis, applied mathematics, discrete mathematics, geometry, mathematical biology, mathematical physics, optimization, partial differential equations, probability, and topology.
MAT 298
Group Study


MAT 299
Individual Study


MAT 299D
Dissertation Research


MAT 399
Individual Study

Individual study of some aspect of mathematics education or a focused work on a curriculum design project under supervision of a faculty member in mathematics.
MCB 010
Introduction to Human Heredity

Topics in human heredity and human gene structure and function, including the genetic basis of human development, causes of birth defects, mental retardation, genetic diseases, sexual determination, development, and behavior.
MCB 023
Biography of Cancer: Past, Present & Future

Historical account of the progression of cancer treatment, prevention, and human understanding of the biological basis of cancer. Past, present and future social implications of cancer treatment and prevention.
MCB 299
Research


MCP 210L
Physiology Laboratory Rotations

One mandatory rotation and up-to two voluntary rotations. Students learn techniques and perform experiments related to particular research problems. At the end of the rotations students give a short talk and hand in a research paper.
MCP 215
Electrophysiology Techniques & Applications

Broad scope of topics in electrophysiology techniques and applications.
MCP 216
Neurophysiology Literature

Lectures covering experimental and theoretical methods in studying cell membrane ion channels and the resulting characterization of the physiological functions and structure/function relationships of some of the most important channel types. Discussion of classical and current original papers.
MCP 290
Seminar

Discussion and critical evaluation of advanced topics and current trends in research. 
MCP 291D
Research Approaches in Physiology 

Current research in physiology. Overall design of experiments and particular research areas.
MCP 298
Group Study 


MCP 299
Research


MDS 403
Science & Practice of Mindfulness & Compassion

Examines current scientific evidence for the effects of different mindfulness and compassion meditation practices in both healthy and clinical samples.  
MDS 411B
Doctoring 1

Small, case-based learning groups with training in patient communication and interviewing techniques, clinical identification and problem solving, applications of social, psychological, cultural, bioethical, and basic science concepts to patient case scenarios, outpatient clinical experiences and didactic presentations.
MDS 415B
Critical Appraisal of Topics in Population Health

Apply foundational skills to explore critical issues in 21st-century public health, including tobacco control, firearm violence, and obesity. In a series of small-group discussions “interpreting the medical literature,” key concepts from epidemiology and biostatistics are reinforced while students are armed with specific strategies for addressing high-risk behaviors in the context of population health.
MDS 416A
Clinical Skills

First in a series of courses that span across the pre-clerkship curriculum designed to integrate the clinical teaching within the pre-clerkship curriculum at the UC Davis School of Medicine. In year 1, students acquire the foundational knowledge, skills, and attitudes to succeed in medical training, including: history taking, physical exam, and interpersonal communication skills.
MDS 416B
Clinical Skills B

Second in a series of courses designed to integrate the clinical teaching within the pre-clerkship curriculum at the UC Davis School of Medicine. In year 2, students build upon the foundation in clinical skills and professional behavior set out in year 1. The year 2 clinical skills course involves applying clinical skills to the caring for patients who present with active medical issues requiring further diagnostic investigation and therapeutic management.
MDS 417A
Clinical Experiences A

Clinical Experiences longitudinal thread is designed to provide continued clinical exposure throughout the pre-clerkship curriculum at the UC Davis School of Medicine. In Year 1, students apply the basic physical exam and history taking skills to real-life patients in outpatient clinical settings.
MDS 417B
Clinical Experiences B

Clinical Experiences longitudinal thread is designed to provide continued clinical exposure throughout the pre-clerkship curriculum at the UC Davis School of Medicine. In year 2, students use their growing knowledge and skill set to complete supervised encounters with real patients in the inpatient setting. In addition to practicing their physical exam and history taking skills, students apply their presentation and counseling skills in real-life encounters.
MDS 418A
Health & Humanity A

Health and Humanity longitudinal thread is designed to integrate wellness, professionalism, and the behavioral sciences within the pre-clerkship curriculum at the UC Davis School of Medicine. Throughout Year 1, students acquire the foundational knowledge surrounding the social determinants of health, implicit bias, and cultural humility.
MDS 429
Transition to Clerkships

Incoming third-year medical students will participate in a variety of educational experiences designed to prepare them to begin their clerkship curriculum. Content will be disseminated in large and small group settings.
MDS 445
Race & Health in the United States

Interprofessional course facilitates the professional and personal developmental of medical students and other health professions students who think they would like to be leaders in securing equity in population health and work environments.
MDS 455
Student Run Clinics

Will learn counseling, diagnosis and treatment of patients with chronic and acute disease under supervision of physician. Meet all requirements and prerequisites of the particular clinic within which they work.
MDS 459
Entry to ARC-MD

Designed to orient ARC-MD and PSTP students to research opportunities at UC Davis, provide a structure for group engagement, expose them to hearing and asking critical research questions, and provide a foundation for the five-year research experience linked to the SOM curriculum.
MDS 460CR
Introduction to Clinical Research

Introduction to the CRGG program and overview of major clinical research topics. Overview of basic clinical skills needed to accomplish CRGG mentored research project.
MDS 461CR
Strategies for Grant Writing

Practical skills and strategies to create successful grant proposals in the NIH style and format. Generating ideas, identifying and accessing research resources, grant components, specific aims, backgound and significance, preliminary studies, budgets, and bios. Matriculation through UC system, and resubmissions.
MDS 462CR
Introduction to Clinical Epidemiology & Study Design

Anatomy and physiology of conducting clinical epidemiologic research. Familiarity with three basic study designs (cross-sectional, case-control,and cohort). Discussion of principles of measurements in clinical epidemiological studies, basic methods for analyzing data, and ethical issues involved in conducting research.
MDS 463CR
Methods in Clinical Research

Overview of major approaches to clinical research, including health services research techniques, informatics, the GCRC, and preclinical methodologies to enhance clinical projects.  Overview of UC Davis clinical research support infrastructure. Methodologies applicable to clinical research and its multi-disciplinary perspective.
MDS 464CR
Responsible Conduct of Research

The nine NIH-mandated modules:  Data Acquisition and Reporting, Mentor Training, Publication Practices and Authorship, Peer Review/Grant Process, Collaborative Science, Human Subjects, Research with Animals, Conflict of Interest, Research Misconduct, and Entrepreneurship/Industry Collaborations/Intellectual Property/Technology Transfer.
MDS 465CR
Introduction to Medical Statistics

Biomedical applications of statistical methods in clinical, laboratory and population medicine. Graphical/tabular data presentation, probability, binomial, Poisson, normal, t-, F-, and Chi-square distributions, elementary nonparametric methods, simple linear regression/correlation, life tables. Microcomputer applications of statistical procedures in population medicine.
MDS 469
Rx One Health SSM

Field course in epidemiology and public health leadership.
MDS 482
Lecture Series in Reproductive Health

Psychosocial and public health aspects of providing quality reproductive health care and application in student-run free clinics and in 3rd year clerkships.
MDS 485
Health Policy Lecture Series

Lecture series provides an overview of local, state, national and international health policy. The current challenges health care reform implementation is facing provides how medical students can successfully advocate for changes in health policy. 
MDS 486
Topics in Health Care Improvement

Lecture series will cover major topics in health care improvement, presented by guest speakers who are leaders in the field. 
MDS 487
History & Ethics of Medicine

Introduction to ethical problems and events in health care in both modern and historical contexts. Eight one-hour and fifteen-minute interactive sessions designed to introduce students to historical topics in medicine and medical ethics.
MDS 492
Interpretive Electrophysiology & Applied Cardiology - SSM

Four-week special study module teaches and provides a basis for systemic interpretation of the EKG as well as cardiology management with the underserved populations in the Central Valley. Addresses underlying normal cardiac structure/function and cardiac abnormalities as reflected in the EKG and tie in the underlying basic science principles of cardiac electrophysiology.
MGB 242
Marketing Communications

Issues in designing a marketing communications strategy. Topics include mass and direct communications, institutional aspects of advertising, consumer behavior, evaluating ad effectiveness, determining ad budget, creative strategy, and use and abuse of promotions.
MGB 247
Customer Service as a Marketing Tool

Understanding the distinct features of services, how to create value through service, methods of building strong relationships with customers, methods of measuring and building customer satisfaction, and measuring the financial impact of service improvement.
MGB 253
Corporate Social Responsibility

Develop a thought process and approach to corporate social responsibility that students will be able to build on during their post-school leadership roles, whether as corporate executives, entrepreneurs, or NGO leaders.
MGB 255
Entrepreneurship & Venture Investment Clinic

Provides the necessary analytical and design tools to create business ideas and refine business models based on emerging technologies. Students learn to work closely in small teams to synthesize technical, strategic, and marketing needs into designs for new ventures.
MGB 262
Money & Security Markets

Examines how money and securities markets are organized; how public agencies, businesses, others obtain and invest funds in those markets. Relationship between interest rates, monetary policy, government's role in improving capital markets, approaches to assessing changes in regulation of specific markets.
MGB 264
Business Taxation

Analysis of the impact of business taxation on investment, production, and finance decisions. Discussion of the relationship between business organization and tax liability. Not intended for tax specialists.
MGB 268
Articulation & Critical Thinking

With commitment to this course, students will become competent public speakers, write well at a level expected in business, think efficiently and critically about business challenges and have a useful personal code of ethics to shape their actions and decisions. No student may repeat course for credit.
MGB 273
Accounting & Reporting for Government Nonprofit Entities

Concepts, methods, and uses of accounting and financial reporting by governmental and nonprofit entities. Introduction to budgeting and performance evaluation, and accounting for entities such as hospitals, universities, and welfare agencies.
MGB 281
Systems Analysis & Design

Design and specification of computer-based information systems. Applications systems development life cycle, use requirements and feasibility assessment, logical and physical design, program development and testing, conversion and implementation.
MGB 284
Applied Linear Models for Management

Covers regression, analysis of variance, and multivariate analysis. Topics will focus on applications to management and policy problems.
MGB 287
Business Database & Database Marketing

Practical introduction to fundamental principles of database management systems and database marketing. Database design. SQL queries. Concepts of database marketing, data warehouse, data visualization and big data analytics.
MGB 401
Crisis Management

Establishes and explores the defining characteristics of crises. Will learn to anchor crisis management firmly within overall strategic management and also acquire a set of useful tools and techniques for planning for and handling actual crises.
MGB 402
Crisis Communications & Reputation Management

Intended to provide you with an understanding of the framework and tools necessary to successfully address communications and reputation management tasks in a variety of crisis situations.
MGB 404
Organizational Change Management

Challenges in getting significant changes made in organizations. Learn Organization Change Management (OCM) techniques and discuss case situations where OCM techniques play a role.
MGB 405
Business Literature

Will examine Business history – historical trends that might influence contemporary business. Some argue that the recent collapse of our financial system might have been averted if business leaders had a better sense of history.
MGB 406
Ethical Issues in Management

Explores the philosophical foundation of ethical theory and its recent applications to business situations. Professional codes of ethics, such as those promulgated by educational, managerial, engineering, scientific, medical and legal professional societies, are presented.
MGB 407
Storytelling for Leadership

Internalize the fundamental principles behind stories that educate, influence, motivate, inspire, persuade and connect.
MGB 408
The Business of the Media

Focuses on the media industries and how emerging digital technologies are disrupting the way media consumption, distribution and business models work. Will highlight the economics of several media, both news and entertainment.
MGB 410
Corporate Governance

Covers recent and not-so-recent business and accounting scandals, discuss how corporations can better operate in the interests of shareholders and the public, and learn from people who rely on corporate governance in making investment decisions.
MGB 411
Turnaround Management

Evaluate the financial performance of a company, identify opportunities for improvement, propose real solutions to enhance performance, and most important inspire action in staff. 
MGB 412
International Marketing

Basic concepts of international marketing. Understanding and managing heterogeneous, dynamic, and interdependent environments across countries. How to develop and implement an international marketing strategy: where and how to compete, how to adapt your marketing mix. 
MGB 413
Sustainable Business Ventures: Business & Energy

Introduction to sustainability goals, indicators, values, measurement techniques, and practice how it applies to large and small enterprise. 
MGB 414
Multi-Channel Marketing

Multi-channel marketing strategies empower managers to create value for different customer segments. Covers the necessary concepts to evaluate and select go-to market strategies in order to capitalize on the ubiquity of modern customers. 
MGB 415
Climate Risks & Opportunities

Provide a working knowledge of the risks and opportunities arising from climate change and climate policy for businesses.
MGB 417
Incentives & Controls

Understand how organizations use financial and nonfinancial performance management and incentive systems to motivate people and manage resources.
MGB 418
Scientific Discovery & Business Innovation at Scale in the Food & Agriculture Sector

Scientific discovery and business innovation within the food and agriculture sector profoundly influences the sustainability of society and enterprise competitiveness. Students will learn how business innovation models co-exist antagonistically or synergistically with scientific discovery and its influence on enterprise competitiveness.
MGB 419
Business Strategy Consulting Skills

Students will learn practical business consulting skills which will help apply strategy theories in the workplace. Students will learn and practice tools to frame and analyze problems, conduct research, communicate findings and navigate client relationships. 
MGB 421
Monte Carlo Simulation for Managerial Analysis

Create Excel-based simulation models across business domains, from finance to hypothesis testing and inventory management. By course-end, students are experts at recognizing this decision-making fallacy and fixing it.
MGB 423
Leader as Coach: An Introduction to Coaching Skills for Leaders

Introduces the fundamental coaching skills and coaching models that leaders can apply in everyday interactions with their team and colleagues in order to build trust, overcome challenges and help others discover their own full potential.
MGB 425
Digital Marketing Techniques

Provides students with an introduction to digital marketing. Introduces MBA students to the fundamental aspects and tools of online marketing communication, i.e., how organizations use digital channels to effectively communicate their value propositions to the target customers.
MGB 426
The Business of Healthcare 

Intended to provide an overall understanding of the unique business aspects of the healthcare industry.
MGB 427
Implementing International Strategy

Looks at the pitfalls of implementing international strategies, and suggest several accessible, yet powerful frameworks to help international managers implement strategies successfully and completely.
MGB 428
Renewable Energy Ventures: Planning, Funding & Regulatory Risk Assessment for Entrepreneurs & Investors

Advanced innovation lab will introduce students to issues addressed by entrepreneurs and investors in renewable ventures. Lectures, simulations, case studies and practical experience of the presenters will be delivered.
MGB 429
Detection & Prevention of Asset Misappropriation Fraud in the Workplace 

Discusses the fundamentals of fraud detection and prevention in the workplace. Learn the major schemes involving workplace fraud, how management can detect fraud and what policies and procedures can be implemented to prevent fraud.
MGB 430
Learning From Catastrophes: Lessons for Managers 

Catastrophes unfold in surprisingly similar ways. Analyze catastrophes to understand these common patterns and investigate how they can be prevented and mitigated. Apply these lessons to management to gain unconventional insights.
MGB 431
Project Management

Students learn project management; including project scope, project planning, milestones and project closing. Important themes include leadership, team dynamics, storytelling/creating a narrative, communication, and conflict management.
MGB 432
Project Management with Applications in Healthcare

Focuses on the heart of healthcare administration and how project management can be applied as a key lever to increase efficiency, decrease costs and improve the patient experience.
MGB 433
Corporate Social Responsibility

Learn practical information that will help students understand the basics of designing, managing and evaluating an effective CSR program. Expose students to a basic set of CSR issues in the context of cross-purpose business challenges and then focus on the analysis and critical decisions that managers must make to move their business and their social agenda forward.
MGB 435
Data Wrangling 

Develop practical skills to pre-process data. Tidied raw data can then be used for downstream data analysis, modeling, and visualization.
MGB 436
Introduction to Derivative Securities

Introduction to derivative securities and other forms of financial innovations.
MGB 437
Healthcare Analytics

Introduction to advanced analytics framework, key Artificial Intelligence & Machine Learning concepts, and modeling techniques towards solving high-value and high-impact healthcare business problems. 
MGB 440C
Integrated Management Project Lead

Integrated Management Project Team leader.
MGB 490A
Topics in Management 

Advanced topics in general management. Varied topics to cover more extensively issues discussed in the MBA core such as business writing, management, organizational behavior, business communications, development, and workplace processes.
MGP 242
Marketing Communications

Issues in designing a marketing communications strategy.  Topics include mass and direct communications, institutional aspects of advertising, consumer behavior, evaluating ad effectiveness, determining ad budget, creative strategy, and use and abuse of promotions.
MGP 247
Customer Service as a Marketing Tool

Understanding the distinct features of services, how to create value through service, methods of building strong relationships with customers, methods of measuring and building customer satisfaction, and measuring the financial impact of service improvement.
MGP 253
Corporate Social Responsibility

Develop a thought process and approach to corporate social responsibility that students will be able to build on during their post-school leadership roles, whether as corporate executives, entrepreneurs, or NGO leaders.
MGP 255
Entrepreneurship & Venture Investment Clinic

Provides the necessary analytical and design tools to create business ideas and refine business models based on emerging technologies. Students learn to work closely in small teams to synthesize technical, strategic, and marketing needs into designs for new ventures.
MGP 262
Money & Security Markets

Examines how money and securities markets are organized; how public agencies, businesses, others obtain and invest funds in those markets. Relationship between interest rates, monetary policy, government's role in improving capital markets, approaches to assessing changes in regulation of specific markets.
MGP 264
Business Taxation

Analysis of the impact of business taxation on investment, production, and finance decisions. Discussion of the relationship between business organization and tax liability. Not intended for tax specialists.
MGP 268
Articulation & Critical Thinking

With commitment to this course, students will become competent public speakers, write well at a level expected in business, think efficiently and critically about business challenges and have a useful personal code of ethics to shape their actions and decisions. No student may repeat course for credit. 
MGP 273
Accounting & Reporting for Government Nonprofit Entities

Concepts, methods, and uses of accounting and financial reporting by governmental and nonprofit entities. Introduction to budgeting and performance evaluation, and accounting for entities such as hospitals, universities, and welfare agencies.
MGP 281
Systems Analysis & Design

Design and specification of computer-based information systems. Applications systems development life cycle, use requirements and feasibility assessment, logical and physical design, program development and testing, conversion and implementation.
MGP 284
Applied Linear Models for Management

Covers regression, analysis of variance, and multivariate analysis. Topics will focus on applications to management and policy problems.
MGP 287
Business Database & Database Marketing

Practical introduction to fundamental principles of database management systems and database marketing. Database design. SQL queries. Concepts of database marketing, data warehouse, data visualization and big data analytics.
MGP 401
Crisis Management

Establishes and explores the defining characteristics of crises. Will learn to anchor crisis management firmly within overall strategic management and also acquire a set of useful tools and techniques for planning for and handling actual crises.
MGP 402
Crisis Communications & Reputation Management

Intended to provide you with an understanding of the framework and tools necessary to successfully address communications and reputation management tasks in a variety of crisis situations.
MGP 404
Organizational Change Management

Challenges in getting significant changes made in organizations. Learn Organization Change Management (OCM) techniques and discuss case situations where OCM techniques play a role.
MGP 405
Business Literature

Will examine Business history – historical trends that might influence contemporary business. Some argue that the recent collapse of our financial system might have been averted if business leaders had a better sense of history.
MGP 406
Ethical Issues in Management

Explores the philosophical foundation of ethical theory and its recent applications to business situations. Professional codes of ethics, such as those promulgated by educational, managerial, engineering, scientific, medical and legal professional societies, are presented.
MGP 407
Storytelling for Leadership

Internalize the fundamental principles behind stories that educate, influence, motivate, inspire, persuade and connect.
MGP 408
The Business of the Media

Focuses on the media industries and how emerging digital technologies are disrupting the way media consumption, distribution and business models work. Will highlight the economics of several media, both news and entertainment.  
MGP 410
Corporate Governance

Covers recent and not-so-recent business and accounting scandals, discuss how corporations can better operate in the interests of shareholders, and the public and learn from people who rely on corporate governance in making investment decisions. 
MGP 411
Turnaround Management

Evaluate the financial performance of a company, identify opportunities for improvement, propose real solutions to enhance performance, and most important inspire action in staff. 
MGP 412
International Marketing

Basic concepts of international marketing. Understanding and managing heterogeneous, dynamic, and interdependent environments across countries. How to develop and implement an international marketing strategy: where and how to compete, how to adapt to your marketing mix. 
MGP 413
Sustainable Business Ventures: Business & Energy

Introduction to sustainability goals, indicators, values, measurement techniques, and practice how it applies to large and small enterprise. 
MGP 414
Multi-Channel Marketing

Multi-channel marketing strategies empower managers to create value for different customer segments. Covers the necessary concepts to evaluate and select go-to market strategies in order to capitalize on the ubiquity of modern customers. 
MGP 415
Climate Risks & Opportunities

Provide a working knowledge of the risks and opportunities arising from climate change and climate policy for businesses.
MGP 417
Incentives & Controls

Understand how organizations use financial and nonfinancial performance management and incentive systems to motivate people and manage resources.
MGP 418
Scientific Discovery & Business Innovation at Scale in the Food & Agriculture Sector

Scientific discovery and business innovation within the food and agriculture sector profoundly influences the sustainability of society and enterprise competitiveness. Students will learn how business innovation models co-exist antagonistically or synergistically with scientific discovery and its influence on enterprise competitiveness.
MGP 419
Business Strategy Consulting Skills

Students will learn practical business consulting skills which will help apply strategy theories in the workplace. Students will learn and practice tools to frame and analyze problems, conduct research, communicate findings and navigate client relationships. 
MGP 421
Monte Carlo Simulation for Managerial Analysis

Create Excel-based simulation models across business domains, from finance to hypothesis testing and inventory management. By course-end, students are experts at recognizing this decision-making fallacy and fixing it.
MGP 423
Leader as Coach: An Introduction to Coaching Skills for Leaders

Introduces the fundamental coaching skills and coaching models that leaders can apply in everyday interactions with their team and colleagues in order to build trust, overcome challenges and help others discover their own full potential.
MGP 425
Digital Marketing Techniques

Provides students with an introduction to digital marketing. Introduces MBA students to the fundamental aspects and tools of online marketing communication, i.e., how organizations use digital channels to effectively communicate their value propositions to the target customers.
MGP 426
The Business of Healthcare 

Intended to provide an overall understanding of the unique business aspects of the healthcare industry.
MGP 427
Implementing International Strategy

Looks at the pitfalls of implementing international strategies, and suggest several accessible, yet powerful frameworks to help international managers implement strategies successfully and completely.
MGP 428
Renewable Energy Ventures: Planning, Funding & Regulatory Risk Assessment for Entrepreneurs & Investors

Advanced innovation lab will introduce students to issues addressed by entrepreneurs and investors in renewable ventures. Lectures, simulations, case studies and practical experience of the presenters will be delivered.
MGP 429
Detection & Prevention of Asset Misappropriation Fraud in the Workplace 

Discusses the fundamentals of fraud detection and prevention in the workplace. Learn the major schemes involving workplace fraud, how management can detect fraud and what policies and procedures can be implemented to prevent fraud.
MGP 430
Learning From Catastrophes: Lessons for Managers 

Catastrophes unfold in surprisingly similar ways. Analyze catastrophes to understand these common patterns and investigate how they can be prevented and mitigated. Apply these lessons to management to gain unconventional insights.
MGP 431
Project Management

Students learn project management; including project scope, project planning, milestones and project closing. Important themes include leadership, team dynamics, storytelling/creating a narrative, communication, and conflict management.
MGP 432
Project Management with Applications in Healthcare

Focuses on the heart of healthcare administration and how project management can be applied as a key lever to increase efficiency, decrease costs and improve the patient experience.
MGP 433
Corporate Social Responsibility

Learn practical information that will help students understand the basics of designing, managing and evaluating an effective CSR program. Expose students to a basic set of CSR issues in the context of cross-purpose business challenges and then focus on the analysis and critical decisions that managers must make to move their business and their social agenda forward.
MGP 435
Data Wrangling 

Develop practical skills to pre-process data. Tidied raw data can then be used for downstream data analysis, modeling, and visualization.
MGP 436
Introduction to Derivative Securities

Introduction to derivative securities and other forms of financial innovations.
MGP 437
Healthcare Analytics

Introduction to advanced analytics framework, key Artificial Intelligence & Machine Learning concepts, and modeling techniques towards solving high-value and high-impact healthcare business problems. 
MGP 440C
Integrated Management Project Lead

Integrated Management Project Team leader.
MGP 490A
Topics in Management 

Advanced topics in general management. Varied topics to cover more extensively issues discussed in the MBA core such as business writing, management, organizational behavior, business communications, development, and workplace processes.
MGT 011A
Elementary Accounting

Basic concepts of accounting; interpreting and using financial statements; understanding accounting principles.
MGT 012Y
Navigating Life’s Financial Decisions

Survey of major life financial decisions (e.g., career choice, consumption v. saving, investments, mortgages, insurance) and how decision-making biases (e.g., overconfidence, present bias, limited attention) can lead to suboptimal choice. Draws on research from economics, psychology, and sociology.
MGT 098
Directed Group Study

Open to all undergraduates, but is primarily intended for lower division students.  
MGT 120
Managing & Using Information Technology

Develop an analytical framework to manage and monitor business systems concerned with operational, human, and organizational interactions. Introduction to computer hardware, systems software, and information systems. Management of information technology and the impact of information systems on modern management.
MGT 140
Marketing for the Technology-Based Enterprise

Quantitative analysis of needs in a product (technology-based) economy, with emphasis on how scientists, engineers, and business people interact to develop and market products and services.
MGT 150
Technology Management

Management of firms in high technology industries such as software development and biotechnology research. Motivating and managing workers, organizing for innovation, and making decisions.
MGT 180
Supply Chain Planning & Management

Develops key concepts and relationships between supply chain design and business models and strategies. Much of the focus is on quantitative techniques for analysis & management of the production and delivery of goods & services by an organization.
MGT 242
Marketing Communications

Issues in designing a marketing communications strategy.  Topics include mass and direct communications, institutional aspects of advertising, consumer behavior, evaluating ad effectiveness, determining ad budget, creative strategy, and use and abuse of promotions.
MGT 247
Customer Service as a Marketing Tool

Understanding the distinct features of services, how to create value through service, methods of building strong relationships with customers, methods of measuring and building customer satisfaction, and measuring the financial impact of service improvement.
MGT 253
Corporate Social Responsibility

Develop a thought process and approach to corporate social responsibility that students will be able to build on during their post-school leadership roles, whether as corporate executives, entrepreneurs, or NGO leaders. 
MGT 255
Entrepreneurship & Venture Investment Clinic

Provides the necessary analytical and design tools to create business ideas and refine business models based on emerging technologies. Students learn to work closely in small teams to synthesize technical, strategic, and marketing needs into designs for new ventures.
MGT 262
Money & Security Markets

Examines how money and securities markets are organized; how public agencies, businesses, others obtain and invest funds in those markets. Relationship between interest rates, monetary policy, government's role in improving capital markets, approaches to assessing changes in regulation of specific markets.
MGT 264
Business Taxation

Analysis of the impact of business taxation on investment, production, and finance decisions. Discussion of the relationship between business organization and tax liability. Not intended for tax specialists.
MGT 268
Articulation & Critical Thinking

Commitment to this course, become competent public speakers, write well at a level expected in business, think efficiently and critically about business challenges and have a useful personal code of ethics to shape their actions and decisions. No student may repeat course for credit.
MGT 273
Accounting & Reporting for Government Nonprofit Entities

Concepts, methods, and uses of accounting and financial reporting by governmental and nonprofit entities. Introduction to budgeting and performance evaluation, and accounting for entities such as hospitals, universities, and welfare agencies.
MGT 281
Systems Analysis & Design

Design and specification of computer-based information systems. Applications systems development life cycle, use requirements andfeasibility assessment, logical and physical design, program development and testing, conversion and implementation.
MGT 284
Applied Linear Models for Management

Covers regression, analysis of variance, and multivariate analysis. Topics will focus on applications to management and policy problems.
MGT 287
Business Database & Database Marketing

Practical introduction to fundamental principles of database management systems and database marketing. Database design. SQL queries. Concepts of database marketing, data warehouse, data visualization and big data analytics.
MGT 288
Special Topics in Management of Information Systems

Managerial aspects of information systems. Topics stressing applications in organizations chosen from: economics of computers and information systems, decision support systems, management of computer-based information systems, office automation.
MGT 401
Crisis Management

Establishes and explores the defining characteristics of crises. Will learn to anchor crisis management firmly within overall strategic management and also acquire a set of useful tools and techniques for planning for and handling actual crises.
MGT 402
Crisis Communications & Reputation Management

Intended to provide you with an understanding of the framework and tools necessary to successfully address communications and reputation management tasks in a variety of crisis situations.
MGT 404
Organizational Change Management

Challenges in getting significant changes made in organizations. Learn Organization Change Management (OCM) techniques and discuss case situations where OCM techniques play a role.
MGT 405
Business Literature

Will examine Business history – historical trends that might influence contemporary business. Some argue that the recent collapse of our financial system might have been averted if business leaders had a better sense of history.
MGT 406
Ethical Issues in Management

Explores the philosophical foundation of ethical theory and its recent applications to business situations. Professional codes of ethics, such as those promulgated by educational, managerial, engineering, scientific, medical and legal professional societies, are presented.
MGT 407
Storytelling for Leadership

Internalize the fundamental principles behind stories that educate, influence, motivate, inspire, persuade and connect.  
MGT 408
The Business of the Media

Focuses on the media industries and how emerging digital technologies are disrupting the way media consumption, distribution and business models work. Will highlight the economics of several media, both news and entertainment.  
MGT 410
Corporate Governance

Covers recent and not-so-recent business and accounting scandals, discuss how corporations can better operate in the interests of shareholders and the public, and learn from people who rely on corporate governance in making investment decisions. 
MGT 411
Turnaround Management

Evaluate the financial performance of a company, identify opportunities for improvement, propose real solutions to enhance performance, and most important inspire action in staff. 
MGT 412
International Marketing

Basic concepts of international marketing. Understanding and managing heterogeneous, dynamic, and interdependent environments across countries. How to develop and implement an international marketing strategy: where and how to compete, how to adapt your marketing mix.
MGT 413
Sustainable Business Ventures: Business & Energy

Introduction to sustainability goals, indicators, values, measurement techniques, and practice how it applies to large and small enterprise. 
MGT 414
Multi-Channel Marketing

Multi-channel marketing strategies empower managers to create value for different customer segments. Covers the necessary concepts to evaluate and select go-to market strategies in order to capitalize on the ubiquity of modern customers. 
MGT 415
Climate Risks & Opportunities

Provide a working knowledge of the risks and opportunities arising from climate change and climate policy for businesses.
MGT 417
Incentives & Controls

Understand how organizations use financial and nonfinancial performance management and incentive systems to motivate people and manage resources.
MGT 418
Scientific Discovery & Business Innovation at Scale in the Food & Agriculture Sector

Scientific discovery and business innovation within the food and agriculture sector profoundly influences the sustainability of society and enterprise competitiveness. Students will learn how business innovation models co-exist antagonistically or synergistically with scientific discovery and its influence on enterprise competitiveness.
MGT 419
Business Strategy Consulting Skills

Students will learn practical business consulting skills which will help apply strategy theories in the workplace. Students will learn and practice tools to frame and analyze problems, conduct research, communicate findings and navigate client relationships. 
MGT 421
Monte Carlo Simulation for Managerial Analysis

Create Excel-based simulation models across business domains, from finance to hypothesis testing and inventory management. By course-end, students are experts at recognizing this decision-making fallacy and fixing it.
MGT 423
Leader as Coach: An Introduction to Coaching Skills for Leaders

Introduces the fundamental coaching skills and coaching models that leaders can apply in everyday interactions with their team and colleagues in order to build trust, overcome challenges and help others discover their own full potential.
MGT 425
Digital Marketing Techniques

Provides students with an introduction to digital marketing. Introduces MBA students to the fundamental aspects and tools of online marketing communication, i.e., how organizations use digital channels to effectively communicate their value propositions to the target customers.
MGT 426
The Business of Healthcare 

Intended to provide an overall understanding of the unique business aspects of the healthcare industry.
MGT 427
Implementing International Strategy

Looks at the pitfalls of implementing international strategies, and suggest several accessible, yet powerful frameworks to help international managers implement strategies successfully and completely.
MGT 428
Renewable Energy Ventures: Planning, Funding & Regulatory Risk Assessment for Entrepreneurs & Investors

Advanced innovation lab will introduce students to issues addressed by entrepreneurs and investors in renewable ventures. Lectures, simulations, case studies and practical experience of the presenters will be delivered.
MGT 429
Detection & Prevention of Asset Misappropriation Fraud in the Workplace 

Discusses the fundamentals of fraud detection and prevention in the workplace. Learn the major schemes involving workplace fraud, how management can detect fraud and what policies and procedures can be implemented to prevent fraud.
MGT 430
Learning From Catastrophes: Lessons for Managers 

Catastrophes unfold in surprisingly similar ways. Analyze catastrophes to understand these common patterns and investigate how they can be prevented and mitigated. Apply these lessons to management to gain unconventional insights.
MGT 431
Project Management

Students learn project management; including project scope, project planning, milestones and project closing. Important themes include leadership, team dynamics, storytelling/creating a narrative, communication, and conflict management.
MGT 432
Project Management with Applications in Healthcare

Focuses on the heart of healthcare administration and how project management can be applied as a key lever to increase efficiency, decrease costs and improve the patient experience.
MGT 433
Corporate Social Responsibility

Learn practical information that will help students understand the basics of designing, managing and evaluating an effective CSR program. Expose students to a basic set of CSR issues in the context of cross-purpose business challenges and then focus on the analysis and critical decisions that managers must make to move their business and their social agenda forward.
MGT 435
Data Wrangling 

Develop practical skills to pre-process data. Tidied raw data can then be used for downstream data analysis, modeling, and visualization.
MGT 436
Introduction to Derivative Securities

Introduction to derivative securities and other forms of financial innovations.
MGT 437
Healthcare Analytics

Introduction to advanced analytics framework, key Artificial Intelligence & Machine Learning concepts, and modeling techniques towards solving high-value and high-impact healthcare business problems. 
MGT 440C
Integrated Management Project Team Lead

Integrated Management Project Team leader.
MGT 490A
Topics in Management 

Advanced topics in general management. Varied topics to cover more extensively issues discussed in the MBA core such business writing, management, organizational behavior, business communications, development, and workplace processes.
MGV 201AV
The Individual & Group Dynamics

Examines basic psychological and social psychological processes shaping human behavior and applies knowledge of these processes to the following organizational problems: motivation, job design, commitment, socialization, culture, individual and group decision making, and team building.
MGV 202AV
Markets & the Firm

Examines the interaction of consumers, firms and government, and the effect this interaction has on the use of resources and firm profitability. Fundamental economic concepts such as marginal analysis, opportunity cost, pricing, and externalities are introduced and applied.
MGV 246V
Negotiations

Basic theory of negotiation; applies theory to process of building teams to achieve business purposes. Covers integrative and distributive strategies of claiming value, how to recognize bargaining tricks, uncovering hidden agendas, brainstorming to extend Pareto frontier.
MGV 438V
Essentials of Quantitative Analysis & Business Storytelling

Quantitative analysis and business storytelling through practical quantitative frameworks, descriptive procedures and real life case studies.
MGV 438V
Quantitative Tools for Business 

Quantitative analysis and business storytelling through practical quantitative frameworks, descriptive procedures and real life case studies.
MGV 490AV
Topics in Management 

Advanced topics in general management. Varied topics to cover more extensively issues discussed in the MBA core such business writing, management, organizational behavior, business communications, development, and workplace processes.
MGV 490AV
Topics in Management 

Advanced topics in general management. Varied topics to cover more extensively issues discussed in the MBA core such business writing, management, organizational behavior, business communications, development, and workplace processes.
MGV 490BV
Topics in Management - Extended  

Extended topics in general management. Varied topics to cover more extensively; management, organizational behavior, finance, marketing, accounting and business analytics. 
MHI 208
Medical Informatics in Web-Based Enterprise Computing 

Introduction to the decision making processes and technologies that are involved in developing web-based distributed enterprise applications in medicine. Focus on the Informatician's role as a team member.
MHI 209
Data Acquisition & Analysis

Examines the nature, acquisition, and analysis of medical data. Data ranges from signals of electrical potentials, sounds, text, images (still and motion), and data from nucleic acid and protein expression and sequencing instruments. 
MHI 210
Introduction to Health Informatics

Overview provides broad exposure to the field of Health Informatics. Topics covered include, but are not limited to, networking, information systems, coding, HL7, Security, and HIPPA.
MHI 211V
Telemedicine

Issues for the development and maintenance of a successful telemedicine program with focus on strategic planning, clinical applications, project management, risk management and legal issues; reimbursement and contracting; human resources and program sustainability.
MHI 211V
Telemedicine

Issues for the development and maintenance of a successful telemedicine program with focus on strategic planning, clinical applications, project management, risk management and legal issues; reimbursement and contracting; human resources and program sustainability.
MHI 215
Beginning and Intermediate Programming in M (MUMPS)

Project-oriented approach to fundamentals of programming in ANSI Standard M (MUMPS) language. Basic syntax, Hierarchical file structure; arrays and string subscripts, indirection and extrinsic functions.
MHI 215
Beginning and Intermediate Programming in M (MUMPS)

Project-oriented approach to fundamentals of programming in ANSI Standard M (MUMPS) language. Basic syntax, Hierarchical file structure; arrays and string subscripts, indirection and extrinsic functions.
MHI 289B
Special Topics in Health Informatics: Seminars in Clinical Translational Informatics

Seminars in current clinical translational informatics research topics. Guest presenters and faculty led discussions.
MHI 290
Seminar in Medical Informatics

Discussion of current graduate research and topics in Medical Informatics. Oral presentations of individual study.
MHI 299
Research in Health Informatics

Independent research in Health Informatics.
MIB 201L
Advanced Microbiology Laboratory Rotations

Two five-week assignments in microbiology research laboratories. Individual research problems with emphasis on methodological/procedural experience and experimental design. 
MIB 299
Research

Research under the guidance of dissertation committee.  
MIC 010
Natural History of Infectious Diseases 

Topics in the natural history of infectious diseases principally affecting humans.  Introduction to infectious microbial agents, ecology, epidemiology, and induction of disease.  Focus on diseases of a contemporary nature.  
MIC 192
Internship

Technical and/or professional experience on or off campus. Supervised by a member of the Microbiology Section faculty.
MIC 299
Research


MMI 291
Seminar in Microbiology & Immunology

Research seminars on current topics in microbiology and immunology.
MMI 410
Physician Scientist Molecular Medicine Journal Club

Weekly seminars by students on research articles in current literature.  Topics/articles to be selected by instructors to include a broad range of frontiers in biomedical literature.
MMI 480A
Medical Immunology

Helping to understand the immune system, the nomenclature and functional significance of the tissues, cells, proteins and genes of the immune system, as well as the normal regulatory mechanisms and pathologic outcomes related to the immune response. 
MMI 480B
Medical Microbiology

Discussion of the diseases caused by infectious agents includes their pathogenesis, clinical manifestations, diagnosis, treatment epidemiology and prevention. Covers the general properties of and diagnostic techniques for bacteria, fungi and viruses.
MPM 200
Introduction to Information Management for Epidemiologists

Introduction to practical application of epidemiological methods to solve problems involving population health data. Emphasis on using worksheet/database software tools for organizing, analyzing, reporting, and interpreting data. Ten, three-hour sessions.
MPM 201
Emerging Issues at the Interface of Animal, Human, & Ecosystem Health

Introduce one health topics emphasizing relationships between environmental, animal and human health. Topics include ecosystem change and impacts on animals and humans, cross-species disease transmission and approaches for addressing critical data gaps to inform ecosystem health and disease prevention.
MPM 204
Medical Statistics III

Continuation of MPM 203. Selecting the best regression equation, conditional logistic regression, Poisson regression, survival analysis, analysis of time dependent variation and trends. Microcomputer applications in population medicine to reinforce principles that are taught in lecture.
MPM 207
Applied Epidemiologic Problem Solving

Integration of epidemiologic and statistical methodology in a problem-solving approach to contemporary animal population health issues. Data validation and manipulation.
MPM 208
Research Planning & Reporting I

Identify and implement research questions through hypothesis construction, articulation of aims, acquiring permits, working as a team, and all other techniques needed to develop a successful research program.
MPM 210
Advanced Health Leadership

Develop skills for effective scientific leadership, including: project management and collaboration, conflict resolution, communication with the public, dynamic distribution of health information, and evidence-based policy influence.
MSA 098
Directed Group Study


MSA 100
Middle East & South Asia: Comparative Perspectives

Ethnographic and historical points of intersection and divergence in various aspects of the Middle East and South Asia in precolonial, colonial, and postcolonial societies.  Anthropological, historical, and theoretical debates surrounding the region.
MSA 112
History of South Asian Islam

Comparative study of Muslim communities of South Asia. Commonalities in cultural identity and historical experience. Rise and spread of Islam, comparative history of Islamic Empires, colonial rule, and post-colonial nationalism.
MSA 121A
Shahnameh: The Persian Book of Kings

In-depth analysis of the Persian Book of Kings (Shahnameh) by Abu al-Qasim Ferdowsi (d. 1020 CE) in its historical context with a comparative perspective on the role of this work in Persian and world literature.
MSA 121C
A Story for a Life: The Arabian Nights

In-depth exploration of The Arabian Nights, the best-known work of pre-modern Arabic literature and a major work of world literature. Analysis of the work in its historical context and in comparison to other frame tales in world literature.
MSA 122A
Themes in the Arabic Novel

Select modern Arabic fiction (novels and short stories) in translation. Thematically connected readings supplemented by non-fictional writings when appropriate.
MSA 131C
Religion & Media in Arab World 

Exploration of the role and experience of media technologies in the Arab world. Study of digital and electronic media as well as alternative media practices. Investigation of new trends in political activism and identity formation.
MSA 151A
Iranian Society & Culture

In-depth investigation of modern Iranian society and culture. Exploration of structures of Iranian society: family, gender, religion, minorities, economy, politics, and state. Iran’s role in the globalizing world, and the role of Iranian diasporas.  
MSA 180
Topics in Middle East & South Asian Studies

Comparative perspective on the Middle East and South Asia. Topics may include: modernity, religious traditions, colonialism, subalternity and social movements, gender and sexuality, history and memory, science and development, ritual and performance, public culture, diasporas.
MSA 181A
Topics in Regional ME/SA Studies 

Iran & Persian topics for students specializing in region-specific Middle East & South Asia Studies.
MSA 181B
Topics in Regional ME/SA Studies  

Indian/South Asia topics for students specializing in region-specific Middle East & South Asia Studies. 
MSA 181C
Topics in Regional ME/SA Studies: Arab Studies

Arab Studies topics.
MST 020A
Early Medieval Culture

Readings (in translation) in medieval culture, such as Codes of Justinian, Confessions of Saint Augustine, Beowulf, the Nibelungenlied, The Song of Roland, the Summa Theologica of Thomas Aquinas, the Chronicles of Froissart, Chaucer's Canterbury Tales, and Dante's Divine Comedy.
MST 020B
The Culture of the High Middle Ages

Great transformations that created the modern world: Constitutional Government, the Hundred Years War, the Black Death, and the Peasants Revolts, the Renaissance, Reformation and Counter-Reformation, and the Baroque.
MST 098
Directed Group Study


MST 099
Special Study for Undergraduates


MST 130A
Special Themes in Medieval Cultures

Each offering concentrates on an interdisciplinary aspect of medieval culture in the Middle East and Europe: the idea of the hero, mysticism, urban development. Extensive readings focused on medieval source material.
MST 130B
Special Themes in Renaissance Culture

Each theme illuminates an interdisciplinary aspect of Renaissance culture in the eastern and western hemispheres: exploration, medical pathology, daily life, baroque culture. Immersion in source material from 1500-1650.
MST 198
Directed Group Study


MST 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates


MUS 003A
Introduction to Music Theory, Part 1

Fundamentals of music theory, ear-training, harmony, counterpoint, and analysis directed toward the development of listening and writing techniques. Intended for the general student.
MUS 010
Introduction to Musical Literature

Introduction to composers and major styles of Western music. Lectures, listening sections, and selected readings. For non-majors.
MUS 011
Musics of the World

Survey of selected art, folk, and popular music cultures from different parts of the world. Emphasis on understanding relationship of musical style, aesthetic principles, and performance practice to wider cultural contexts.
MUS 028
Introduction to African American Music

Survey of African American music, such as spirituals, blues, ragtime, jazz, theater, gospel, R&B, rap, and art music. Emphasis on historical and sociocultural contexts, as well as African roots.
MUS 106
History of Rock Music

Rock and the evolution of rock styles in historical and cultural context. For non-majors.
MUS 115
History of Film Music

Film music from silent films to movies of the past decade. How music supports and shapes film narrative and structure. Use of jazz, rock and classical music in film.
MUS 116
Introduction to the Music of The Beatles

Survey of music of The Beatles, focusing on the songs of Lennon and McCartney. Emphasis on understanding their evolution as musicians, composers and cultural figures. Discussion of their musical influences in wider cultural contexts.
MUS 117
The Broadway Musical

Exploration of a variety of Broadway and film musicals from different time periods, and how musicals reflect and help create social reality, and the different aspects of the creative process as manifested through music, dance, scenery, and acting. 
MUS 202
Notation

Study of musical notation; investigation of techniques for editing Medieval and Renaissance music.
MUS 203
Music Composition

Technical projects that explore compositional problems, the skill and techniques with which to solve them, and free composition.
MUS 210A
Proseminar in Music: Theory & Analysis

Voice-leading analysis of tonal music derived from Schenker and pitchclass set theory. Recent work on compositional design, generalizations of the concept of interval, psychologically oriented music theory, and theories of durational structure and timbre.
MUS 210B
Proseminar in Music: Musicology &Criticism

Issues and concepts of music history, including performance practice questions for specific repertoires and periods; principles, aims, and methods of archival study; historical theory; evolution of musical styles; philosophical debates about goals and aims of the discipline in general.
MUS 210C
Proseminar in Music: Ethnomusicology

Introduction to ethnomusicology through its intellectual history, theoretical approaches, analytical techniques, and methodologies. 
MUS 212
Ethics of Musical Ethnography

Role, methodology, perception, and assumptions of the ethnomusicologist in ethnographic scholarship. Examination of complex ethical and political questions in relation to practical fieldwork techniques.
MUS 213
Transcription & Notation

Practical instruction in the transcription and analysis of primarily non-Western musics. Analytical and theoretical issues, the politics of representation, and the cultural values and ideologies implicit in notation.
MUS 214
Recent Issues in Ethnomusicology

Issues, schools of thought, and basic literature in ethnomusicology from the 1980s to present. Emphasis on theory and methodology.
MUS 221
Topics in Music History

Studies in selected areas of music history and theory.
MUS 222
Techniques of Analysis

Analysis and analytical techniques as applied to music of all historical style periods. 
MUS 299
Individual Study


NAS 001
Introduction to Native American Studies

Introduction to Native American Studies with emphasis upon basic concepts relating to Native American historical and political development.
NAS 005A
Writer's Workshop

Disciplinary writing support course focuses on the development of writing and revision strategies, exploring ways to understand a writing task, to develop appropriate content for a writing task, to revise content to reflect competence as a communicator. 
NAS 007
Indigenous & Minority Languages

Survey of the status of indigenous, immigrant, and other minority languages in the Americas and around the world. Topics include linguistic diversity, language endangerment & revitalization, heritage language maintenance in immigrant communities, and language change due to transcultural interactions.
NAS 010
Native American Experience

Introduction to the diverse cultures of Native American peoples from North, Central, and South America. Emphasis on Native American voices in the expression of cultural views and in the experience of conflicting values.
NAS 012
Native American/Indigenous Film

Survey and analysis of the visual colonization of Native American peoples and the contemporary responses by Native American/Indigenous filmmakers claiming visual sovereignty. Examines a range of filmic genres including documentary, features, shorts, festivals, TV and Internet screening.
NAS 032
Native American Music & Dance

Introduction to the music and dance of Indigenous peoples across the Americas. Indigenous music and dance from comparative, interdisciplinary, and global perspectives in order to learn about historic and contemporary issues (e.g., social, cultural, economic, technical, and aesthetic) facing Indigenous communities, and the ways in which the issues are expressed through music and dance practices.
NAS 033
Introduction to Native American Art

Introduction to Native American Art from throughout North America, inclusive of traditional forms, techniques and designs in a range of media including ceramics, basketry, fiberwork, carving, painting, sculpture and photography within a context of social and political history.
NAS 034
Native American Art Studio

Studio projects to be influenced by contemporary and traditional Native American arts. Examples of designs and media presented in lectures will be of indigenous origin. Introduction and familiarized with various materials and techniques.
NAS 101
Contemporary Native American Art

Examination of contemporary artworks by selected Native American and Indigenous Master artists, in a wide range of media, including ceramics, metal arts, photography, video, painting, installation and performance within a context of political and social histories.
NAS 107
Learning Native American Languages

Self-directed study of a Native American language using revitalization strategies. Origins of language endangerment and the importance of language for cultural reclamation.
NAS 108
Indigenous Languages of California

Survey of the indigenous languages of the California region: linguistic prehistory, languages at first European contact, subsequent language loss, current efforts at language and cultural revitalization, indigenous languages of recent immigrants to California.
NAS 109
Native American Language Spotlight

In-depth examination of the history, structure, and sociolinguistics of a particular Native American language or language family. Different language studied each time the course is offered. Oral proficiency component included in some years.
NAS 110A
Quechua Language & Society: Beginning Level 1

Quechua language and society emphasizing the practical use of the language. Provides some basic Quechua communication skills and with an initial knowledge about contemporary Andean society and the status of Quechua language today.  
NAS 119
Introduction to Federal Indian Law

Introduction to the foundational cases and statutes of federal Indian law, from European Contact through the 20th century.
NAS 123
Native Foods & Farming of the Americas

Crop domestication, agrodiversity, and cuisines of the Americas. Cultural and social history of native American foods like maize, potatoes, quinoa, chocolate, peppers, beans, avocados, etc. Discussion of socio-economic, environmental, legal challenges facing indigenous and peasant farmers today.
NAS 133
Ethnohistory of Native People of Mexico & Central America

Ethnohistorical development of pre-colonial, colonial, post-colonial Mexican and Central American indigenous people; the impact of economic and political factors on the process of cultural adaptation. Attention is given to the questions of nation-building, forced assimilation, indigenous resistance, organized political responses.
NAS 133A
Ethnohistory of Native Peoples of Mexico & Central America to 1500

Ethnohistorical development of the indigenous peoples of Mexico and Central America up to and including the earliest period of European contact. Focus is on indigenous written historical records of the Maya, Mixtec, and Nahuatl peoples.  
NAS 133B
Ethnohistory of Native Peoples of Mexico & Central America 1500 to 2000

Ethnohistory of indigenous peoples of Mexico and Central America from 1500 to contemporary times. Focus on social and cultural dynamics, particularly the role of indigenous people in the process of nation-state building in Mexico and Central America.
NAS 157
Native American Religion & Philosophy

Religious and philosophical traditions of Native American/indigenous peoples of the Americas.
NAS 161
California Indian Environmental Policy I

Contemporary California Indian environmental policy issues, with a focus on water, minerals, contamination, and alliance-building. Issues will be placed within historical and political context, drawing on theories of Native environmental ethics, environmental justice, and Federal Indian law.
NAS 162
California Indian Environmental Policy II

Contemporary California Indian environmental policy issues, with a focus on planning, site protection, and collaborative structures. Issues will be placed within historical and political context, drawing on theories of Native environmental ethics, environmental justice, and Federal Indian law.
NAS 180
Native American Women

Native American women's life experiences, cross-cultural comparisons of gender roles, and Native women's contemporary feminist thought. Utilizes texts from literature, social science, and autobiography/biography.
NAS 181C
Contemporary Native American Poetry

Works of poetry by contemporary Native American/indigenous poets, with some attention to traditional cultural poetic expressions.
NAS 207
Leadership Skills & Strategies in California Language Documentation & Revitalization

Introduction to the indigenous languages of the Americas, with a focus on California; an examination of how contemporary Native communities document and revitalize their heritage languages. Learn to assist and administer language programs.
NAS 233
Visual Sovereignty

Extensively examine the field of contemporary Native American and Indigenous photography, film and performance through research of artworks, writings by artists, theorists, and material in museum collections.
NAS 237
Native American Art Collections & Museums

Research and examination of regional Native American art held in museums and other public institutions, as well as privately-held collections. Includes onsite viewing and research of museum collections and archives. 
NAS 240
Native American Public Health: Topics & Issues

Introduction to Native American public health issues and contributing causal factors (including environmental justice and historical trauma); the dimensions of cultural competency in diagnosis and service provision; the structure of Native health care institutions; and debates in Native treatment modalities.
NAS 246
Native American/Indigenous Research Methodologies

Introduction to advanced methodologies currently influencing research in Native American Studies and among Indigenous communities. Develop an original project and course assignments will guide them through the process of research design and implementation.
NAS 254
Native American Literature

Introduction to the field of Native American Literature, creative works (fiction, poetry, memoir, personal essay), literary studies.
NAS 257
Indigenous Religious Traditions in the Americas

Religious/spiritual traditions, belief-systems, and world-views of Native American/indigenous peoples in the Americas.  Land, ecological knowledge, sacred sites, the role of tricksters, language (revitalization), gender, ethics of representation, cultural revitalization, renewed ancient knowledge and practices, ceremonial (and daily) performance of the sacred, music, the arts, the worlds of the sacred, the rules of the sacred, freedom of religion.
NAS 280
Ethnohistorical Theory & Method

Discussion of the ethnohistorical method; the utilization of diverse types of data, especially documentary sources, to reconstruct socio-cultural history. Particular attention to the applied area of ethnohistory in the solution of contemporary social problems.
NEM 010V
General Biology

Concepts and issues in biology. Emphasis on composition and structure of organisms; regulation and signaling; heredity, evolution and the interaction and interdependence among life forms and their environments. Designed for students not specializing in biology. 
NEM 210
Molecular Phylogenetic Analysis 

Theory and practice of inferring phylogenetic trees using molecular sequence data. Practical techniques for obtaining sequence data, advantages and disadvantages of common approaches for inferring trees, statistical methods for comparing alternative hypotheses. 
NEM 290
Seminar 


NEU 420
Clinical Neurosciences

Pathophysiology underlying neurological disorders, including disorders of development, muscle, nerve, cerebral circulation, metabolism, myelin, cortical function, movement, cerebrospinal fluid, autonomic function and special senses.  Anatomical basis of clinical testing, nervous system infection, neoplasia and trauma.
NEU 440
Where Drugs Come From: How They are Discovered, Developed, Regulated, & Marketed

Includes the following topics: Overview of the Drug Discovery Process; Drug Regulation in the United States; Patents and Other Forms of Exclusivity; Drug Targets and Pharmacology; Identification of Lead Candidates; Preclinical Assessment; ADME Including Basic Pharmacokinetic Principles; Principles of Drug Toxicity; Principles of Drug Safety; Clinical Trials; Generic Drugs; Pharmaceutical Industry; Drug Distribution and Marketing; Dietary Supplements; Controlled Substances.
NEU 493F
Issues in Geriatric Care

Four-week module teaches an approach to common problems in the elderly through history and exam, with an emphasis on integration of underlying anatomy, physiology, and pathophysiology in common geriatric presentations. 
NPB 010
Elementary Human Physiology

Introduction to physiology for non-science majors. Includes basic cell physiology and survey of major organ systems and how they function in homeostasis and human health. 
NPB 011
Exercise & Fitness: Principles & Practice

Human movement from physiological, psychological, sociological, and historical perspectives. Biology and psychology of exercise across the human lifespan.
NPB 012
The Human Brain & Disease

Normal function and diseases of the human brain and nervous system. Diseases discussed include Parkinson's, Alzheimer's, leprosy, amnesia and schizophrenia. Intended for non-science majors.
NPB 013
Extreme Animal Athletes

Overview of biomechanics, focusing on animal locomotion. Physical principles underlying traits such as speed, maneuverability, endurance, and precision. Comparisons of animals and human athletes performing similar feats, with animals often outperforming humans by a wide margin. Biomechanical concepts through hands-on exercises, problem sets, and readings from the scientific literature.
NPB 014
Illusions: Fooling the Brain

Introduction to perceptual processing in the human nervous system; illusions.
NPB 015
The Biology & Physiology of Aging

Broad examination of age-associated changes in body functions. Includes basic cell physiology, a survey of major organ systems and the age-induced alterations in system function. Some age-associated diseases will also be examined. Intended for non-science majors.
NPB 015V
The Biology & Physiology of Aging

Broad examination of the biological and physiological basis of aging in animals and plants. Concepts in demographic, evolutionary, genetic, and cell aging. Major human organ systems, age-related alterations in system function, and age-related diseases. Intended for non-science majors.
NPB 017
The Path to Cyborgs: Introduction to Prostheses & Human Machine Interfaces 

Interface of biology and technology. Mind-controlled prosthetic limbs, artificial organs, and implantable devices. Emphasis on basic physiological functions and how they can be replaced by devices. Suitable for majors and non-majors.
NPB 018
Biological Science for Social Justice

Broad survey of the many ways one can use the biological sciences to better the lives of others and break down barriers that have restricted social mobility.
NPB 068
Biology of Drug Addiction & Abuse

Broad examination of addictive substances and their use/abuse. Topics include historical perspective, physiological effects, etiology, neurobiology of addiction and the impact of drugs on contemporary society. Intended for non-science majors.  
NPB 108Y
Animal Behavior Laboratory 

Hybrid course, consisting of limited in-person lectures and the rest laboratory exercises. Laboratory exercises are online, and require students to view and score videos of animal behavior in order to test behavioral hypotheses.
NPB 198
Directed Group Study

Directed group study. May be taught abroad.
NPB 221
Cellular Neuroscience

Advanced course on cellular and subcellular organization of the nervous system. Membrane channels, sensory transduction, synaptic transmission and cellular aspects of development and learning. 
NPB 285
Literature in Visual Neuroscience


NSC 285
Literature in Visual Neuroscience

Critical presentation and discussion of current literature in visual neuroscience.
NSC 289
Topics in Molecular & Developmental Neurobiology

Analysis and discussion of seminal and current research papers in molecular and developmental neurobiology. Different topics will be covered each quarter. In the past topics have included, "Synaptic vesicle dynamics," "Neuronal polarity," and "Glutamate receptors."
NSC 295
Literature in Neuroengineering

Critical presentation and discussion of current literature in neuroengineering.
NSU 474
Away Acting Internship in Neurosurgery

Away acting internship in Neurosurgery.
NUB 210C
Advanced Nutrition III: Nutrition in Health & Disease

Integration of biochemical, physiological, and genetic aspects of nutrition in the context of clinical and epidemiological observations related to health and disease, including obesity and diabetes, cancer, vascular and neurodegenerative diseases, osteoporosis, and birth defects. Review and consideration of governmental.
NUT 010
Discoveries & Concepts in Nutrition

Nutrition as a science; historical development of nutrition concepts; properties of nutrients and foods.
NUT 010V
Discoveries & Concepts in Nutrition

Nutrition as a science; historical development of nutrition concepts; properties of nutrients and foods.
NUT 010Y
Discoveries & Concepts in Nutrition

Nutrition as a science; historical development of nutrition concepts; properties of nutrients and foods.
NUT 011
Current Topics & Controversies in Nutrition

Exploration of current applications and controversies in nutrition. Rread scientific journal articles and write summaries, as well as give brief oral presentations. Topics change to reflect current interests and issues.
NUT 120BN
Nutritional Geography

Nutritional geography from historical and contemporary perspectives; the geographical approach to food and diet; cultural and environmental factors that influence dietary practices; food-related landscapes and patterns.  
NUT 270
Scientific Ethics in Biomedical Studies:   Emphasis on Nutrition

Scientific ethics in biomedical studies, especially nutrition. Discussion and case study presentations on scientific integrity, fraud, misconduct, conflict of interest, human and animal research protections.
OBG 192
Shifa Clinic Student Volunteer

Supervised work experience in Obstetrics & Gynecology.
OBG 220
Genetics of Reproduction

Introduction to genetics of mammalian reproduction for domestic species,species used in research, and the human. Mendelian and non-Mendelian modes of inheritance. Research paper.
OBG 480
The Birthing Process

Open only to UC Davis medical students. Training to assist in the birthing process as a Doula. Topics not covered in the summer course.
OSU 466
Away Clerkship in Orthopaedics

Orthopaedic advanced clerkship at an approved institution.
OTO 465
Away Acting Internship in Otolaryngology

Externship rotation for Acting Internships in Otolaryngology.
PAS 410A
Advanced Clinical Skills

Continuation of focus on history taking and physical examination skills with advanced/specialized content.  
PAS 410C
Advanced Clinical Skills

Continuation of focus on history taking and physical examination skills with advanced/specialized content related to specified systems. 
PBI 223
Special Topics in Scientific Method

Examine the historical and philosophical background of the scientific method. Analyze the rational, perceptual, causal, creative and social aspects of scientific knowledge. Clarify the roles of reason, experimentation and creativity in scientific research.
PBI 229
Molecular Biology of Plant Reproduction

Molecular genetic basis of plant reproduction. Emphasis on understanding developmentally regulated gene expression as it relates to the major changes that occur during plant reproduction and on the genetic control of flowering.
PBI 290A
Faculty Seminar

Discussion of research area of seminar speakers in Plant Biology Graduate Group Seminar Series.
PBI 290B
Seminar

Seminars presented by visiting scientists on research topics of current interest.
PBI 297T
Tutoring in Plant Biology

Offers graduate students, particularly those not serving as teaching assistants, the opportunity to gain teaching experience.
PBI 298
Group Study


PED 463
Medical & Mental Health Evaluation of Children at Risk for Maltreatment

Elective for fourth-year medical students covers basic areas of knowledge needed for child abuse prevention and consultation. Rotation includes legals cases, abuse exams, child and parent interactive therapy and visits to community organizations.
PED 498
Directed Group Study

Explore in-depth various topics in Pediatrics. Extensive contact with and oversight by instructor.
PER 001
Elementary Persian

Introduction to listening, speaking, reading and writing skills in Persian and to Persian culture. 
PFS 200
Methods & Materials in Theatre Research

Essential research tools in theatre and related fields; bibliographies, primary sources; methods of evaluating and presenting evidence; delineating research areas in the field.
PFS 259
Topics in Contemporary Theatre & Performance

Special topics designed to study in depth aspects of contemporary performance including performance analysis, cultural and historical context, modes of production, theoretical and political entailments, and issues of spectatorship; e.g., "Brecht and After," "British Theater," "Race and Gender in Performance."
PFS 265A
Performance Studies: Modes of Production

Introduction to the literature of performance production in a variety of media: theatre, dance, film, video, computer-based, looking at cultural, aesthetic, rhetorical and political theory. 
PFS 265B
Performance Studies: Signification & the Body

Introduction to analysis of the body in performance, drawing on theoretical models from several fields.
PFS 265C
Performance Studies: Performance & Society

Introduction to the role of performance (broadly defined), in everyday life, sociopolitical negotiation, identity, social movements, the media, and the state.
PFS 265D
 Performance Studies: Theory, History, Criticism

Introduction to the theory, history and criticism, informing performance studies.
PHA 205
Problem Solving in Pharmacology

Introduction to a current biomedical problem that would benefit from a developing drug and will develop an experimental strategy for addressing the issue. Develop model systems for testing various classic and recent pharmacological approaches.
PHA 225
Gene & Cellular Therapies

Gene therapy from basic concepts to clinical applications. Topics include the human genome and genetic variation, genetic diseases, methods to manipulate gene expression, viral and non-viral delivery vectors, history and progress of gene therapy, case studies, and ethical issues.
PHE 001
Physical Activities

Physical Education Activities classes offered in the following areas: aquatics, personal fitness, martial arts, individual sports, and team sports. These academic classes are instructional rather than recreational and are intended to improve activity specific skills and knowledge.
PHE 001A
Physical Activity-Archery

Physical Education Activity classes in Archery. The academic classes are instructional rather than recreational and are intended to improve activity specific skills and knowledge.
PHE 001AQ
Physical Activity-Aquatic Family

Physical Education Activity classes in Aquatics. The academic classes are instructional rather than recreational and are intended to improve activity specific skills and knowledge.
PHE 001F
Physical Activity-Fitness Family

Physical Education Activity classes in Personal Fitness. The academic classes are instructional rather than recreational and are intended to improve activity specific skills and knowledge.
PHE 001G
Physical Activity-Golf

Physical Education Activity classes in Golf. These academic classes are instructional rather than recreational and are intended to improve activity specific skills and knowledge.
PHE 001I
Physical Activity-Individual Sport Family

Physical Education Activity classes in Individual Sports. The academic classes are instructional rather than recreational and are intended to improve activity specific skills and knowledge.
PHE 001M
Physical Activity-Martial Arts Family

Physical Education Activity classes in Martial Arts. The academic classes are instructional rather than recreational and are intended to improve activity specific skills and knowledge.
PHE 001R
Physical Activity-Racquet Family

Physical Education Activity classes in Racquet sports. The academic classes are instructional rather than recreational and are intended to improve activity specific skills and knowledge.
PHE 001RC
Physical Activity-Rock Climbing

Physical Education Activity classes in Rock Climbing. The academic classes are instructional rather than recreational and are intended to improve activity specific skills and knowledge.
PHE 001S
Physical Activity-Self Defense for Women

Physical Education Activity classes in Self Defense for Women. The academic classes are instructional rather than recreational and are intended to improve activity specific skills and knowledge.
PHE 001T
Physical Activity-Team Sports Family

Physical Education Activity classes in Team Sports. The academic classes are instructional rather than recreational and are intended to improve activity specific skills and knowledge
PHE 007
Professional Physical Education Activities: Men & Women/Coaching Leadership

Fundamental skills for: (a) coaching competitive athletics; (b) classroom teaching and coaching, and (c) classroom teaching and officiating. 
PHE 015
Administration of Intramural Sports

Planning and administering intramural sports programs at the high school and college level.
PHE 040
Drugs & Society

Pharmacology, methods of use, and effects of use of psychoactive and performance-enhancing drugs. Historical overview of drug use. Identification of behavior of at-risk and user populations.
PHE 044
Principles of Healthful Living

Application of scientific and empirical knowledge to personal, family, and community health problems.
PHE 120
Sport in American Society

Sociological approaches to the study of sport and contemporary American culture, including sport's interaction with politics, economics, religion, gender, race, media and ethics.  Socialization factors involving youth, scholastic, collegiate, and Olympic sport.
PHE 131
Physical Activity & the Disabled

Study of the diverse and complex nature of individuals with disabilities and how they adapt to their disabilities in daily living. Integration of individuals with disabilities into the community, schools, and physical activity and recreational programs.
PHE 142
Physical Education in the Public Schools

Analysis and study of the principles and methods basic to teaching physical education at the elementary and secondary levels.
PHE 150
Recreation in the Community

The nature and scope of community recreation programs in California emphasizing low income, highly populated areas, and poor rural communities.
PHI 001
Introduction to Philosophy

Problems of philosophy through major writings from various periods.Problems are drawn from political, aesthetic, religious, metaphysical, and epistemological concerns of philosophy.
PHI 005
Critical Reasoning

Criteria of good reasoning in everyday life and in science. Topics to be covered may include basic principles of deduction and induction; fallacies in reasoning; techniques and aids to reasoning; principles of scientific investigation; aids to clarity. 
PHI 007
Philosophical Perspectives on Sexuality

Philosophical issues related to sexuality, including, but not limited to, ethical and social issues regarding sexual practice, orientation, classification and identity.
PHI 007Y
Philosophical Perspectives on Sexuality

Philosophical issues related to sexuality, including, but not limited to, ethical and social issues regarding sexual practice, orientation, classification and identity.
PHI 010
Introduction to Cognitive Science

Introduction to the interdisciplinary cognitive scientific approach to the study of mind, drawing concepts and methods from psychology, philosophy, linguistics, artificial intelligence, and other disciplines. 
PHI 011
Asian Philosophy 

Survey of the main philosophical systems of south and east Asia: Hinduism, Buddhism, Confucianism, and Taoism. Topics include the nature of reality, including God, the universe and the human self, human knowledge, and the proper conduct of human life.
PHI 012
Introduction to Symbolic Logic

Syntax and semantics of the symbolic language sentence logic. Symbols of sentence logic. Translation between sentence logic and English. Truth table interpretation of sentence logic. Proof techniques.  Application of truth tables and proof techniques to arguments in English.
PHI 013
Minds, Brains, & Computers

Computational theories of the nature of the mind. Mind as a computer process. Possibility of machine intelligence, consciousness, and mentality.
PHI 013G
Minds, Brains, & Computers with Discussion

Computational theories of the nature of the mind. Mind as a computer process. Possibility of machine intelligence, consciousness, and mentality.
PHI 014
Ethical & Social Problems in Contemporary Society

Philosophical issues and positions involved in contemporary moral and social problems. Possible topics include civil disobedience and revolution, racial and sex discrimination, environment, population control, technology and human values, sexual morality, freedom in society.
PHI 015
Introduction to Bioethics

Critical analysis of normative issues raised by contemporary medicine and biology. Possible topics include euthanasia, reproductive technologies, genetic engineering, informed consent and patient autonomy, experimentation on human subjects and non-human animals.
PHI 016
Philosophical Foundations of American Democracy

The philosophical underpinnings of democratic government and the tension between the goals of providing security and of preserving democracy and civil liberties. Illustration of the tension through focus on issues related to war and terrorism.
PHI 017
Language, Thought, & World

Puzzles in the philosophy of language, such as what language is, how language conveys thoughts, whether we each speak our own private language, and what we can learn about the world by studying language.
PHI 021
Philosophical Classics of the Ancient Era

Survey of ancient Western philosophy with special attention to the Pre-Socratics, Plato, Aristotle, and the Sceptics.
PHI 022
Philosophical Classics of the Modern Era

Survey of modern Western philosophy, including Descartes, Locke, Hume, and Kant.
PHI 024
Introduction to Ethics

Reading of historical and contemporary philosophical works in ethics.  Topics include the nature of morality, the justification of moral claims, and major ethical theories, such as consequentialist, deontological, and virtue theories.
PHI 030
Introduction to Philosophy of Science

Basic problems in the philosophy of science, common to the physical, biological, and social sciences. Analysis of explanation, confirmation theory, observational and theoretical terms, the nature of theories, operationalism and behaviorism, realism, reduction. 
PHI 031
Appraising Scientific Reasoning

Introduction to scientific hypotheses and the kinds of reasoning used to justify such hypotheses. Emphasis on adequate justification, criteria, and strategies for distinguishing scientific from pseudoscientific theories. Concrete historical and contemporary cases.
PHI 032
Understanding Scientific Change

Concepts of scientific change in historical and philosophical perspective. Survey of models of growth of knowledge, 17th century to present. Relationship between logic of theories and theory choice. Kuhns revolution model. Examples from various sciences.
PHI 038
Introduction to Philosophy of Biology

Non-technical introduction to philosophical, social, and scientific ideas, methods and technologies in contemporary biological fields such as evolution, genetics, molecular biology, ecology, behavior.  Philosophical consideration of determinism, reductionism, explanation, theory, modeling, observation, experimentation. Evaluation of scientific explanations of human nature.
PHI 103
Philosophy on Mind

The relation between mind and body, our knowledge of other minds, and the explanation of mental acts. Discussion of such concepts as action, intention, and causation.
PHI 238
Philosophy of Language Workshop

Discussion of recently published, unpublished and in-progress research in philosophy of language, including work on the relation of language and mind, of language and logic, and linguistic theory.
PHR 198
Directed Group Study


PHR 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates


PHR 210
Epidemiological Approaches to Waterborne Zoonotic Pathogens

Waterborne zoonotic diseases remain a significant cause of human illness. Review key waterborne pathogens; their biology, fate and transport in aquatic systems; on-farm management practices for reducing microbial contamination of California's fresh and marine aquatic resources from livestock production systems.
PHR 290
Seminar

Presentation and discussion of advanced and current topics in population health and reproduction.
PHR 298
Group Study


PHR 299
Research


PHY 010C
Physics of California

Atmospheric phenomena common in CA, local weather patterns and microclimes. Applications to CA energy, water, and resource management policies.  Physics underlying regional sports in CA.  
PHY 010CY
Physics of California

Conceptual understanding of the physics underlying regional sports in CA. Focus on skiing, surfing, and scuba diving. Atmospheric phenomena common in CA, local weather patterns and microclimes, applications to CA energy, and water are also discussed.
PHY 012
Visualization in Science

Production, interpretation, and use of images in physics, astronomy, biology, and chemistry as scientific evidence and for communication of research results.
PHY 040
Introduction to Physics Computation

Introduction to programming using C++ with examples from computational physics. Introduction to modern tools used for scientific analysis, including Scientific computing with Python.
PHY 049
Supplementary Work in Lower Division Physics

With consent of instructor, students with partial credit in lower division physics courses may complete the credit under this heading.
PHY 185
Alumni Seminar Series

Weekly guest speakers (usually a physics alumnus or alumna) tell students about their careers.  Speakers use their experience to give students valuable perspectives on life after a degree in physics. 
PHY 190
Careers in Physics

Overview of important research areas in physics, discussions of research opportunities and internships, strategies for graduate school and industrial careers, the fellowship and assistantship selection process, preparation of resumes, personal statements, and letters of recommendation.
PHY 197T
Tutoring in Physics & Astronomy

Tutoring of students in lower division courses. Leading of small voluntary discussion groups affiliated with one of the department's regular courses. Weekly meeting with instructor.
PHY 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates


PHY 252A
Techniques of Experimental Physics

Introduction to techniques and methods of designing and executing experiments. Problems and examples from condensed matter research will be utilized.
PHY 252B
Techniques of Experimental Physics

Introduction to techniques and methods of designing and executing experiments. Problems and examples from nuclear and particle research will be utilized.
PHY 252C
Statistics & Data Analysis for Particle Physics

Introduction to statistical data analysis methods in particle physics. Theoretical lectures combined with practical computer laboratory work.
PHY 253
Signals & Noise in Physics

Techniques for extracting signals from noise, systematic error.
PHY 295
Introduction to Departmental Research

Seminar to introduce first- and second-year physics graduate students to the fields of specialty and research of the Physics staff.
PHY 299
Research


PLB 010
Plant Biology

The social and natural science of plants. Cultural history and socioeconomic importance of plants. Biology of plants reproduction, including flowers, seeds and fruits. Historical, cultural, religious and medicinal uses of plants. Plants in the visual arts, music and literature.
PLP 198
Directed Group Study


PLP 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates


PLP 290
Seminar

Review and evaluation of current research in plant pathology.
PLP 295
Seminar in Mycology

Review and evaluation of current literature and research in mycology.
PLP 298
Special Group Study


PLP 299
Research


PLS 001
Agriculture, Nature & Society

Multiple perspectives and connections between natural sciences, social sciences, and agriculture. Emphasizes agriculture's central position between nature and society and its key role in our search for a productive, lasting and hospitable environment. Several full-period field trips provide hands-on learning.
PLS 007
Just Coffee: The Biology, Ecology & Socioeconomic Impacts of the World’s Favorite Drink

Coffee used as a case study to examine biological, ecological and social factors influencing sustainability of farming systems and how food production systems impact human well-being.
PLS 007V
Just Coffee: The Biology, Ecology & Socioeconomic Impacts of the World's Favorite Drink

Coffee used as a case study to examine biological, ecological and social factors influencing sustainability of farming systems and how food production systems impact human well-being.
PLS 014
Introduction to Current Topics in Plant Biology

Introduction to scientific methods and current understanding of genetics, metabolism, and cellular structure in plants, with special emphasis on topics related to societal issues, such as herbal medicines and genetically modified organisms. Designed for students not specializing in biology.
PLS 015
Introduction to Sustainable Agriculture

Multidisciplinary introduction to agricultural sustainability with a natural sciences emphasis.  Sustainability concepts and perspectives.  Agricultural evolution, history, resources and functions.  Diverse agricultural systems and practices and their relative sustainability.  Laboratories provide direct experience with selected agricultural practices and systems.
PLS 049
Organic Crop Production Practices

Principles and practices of organic production of annual crops.  Including organic crops, soil, and pest management, cover cropping, composting, seeding, transplanting, irrigation, harvesting and marketing.
PLS 092
Internship

Work experience on or off campus in subject areas pertaining to plant and environmental sciences.  Internship supervised by a faculty member.
PLS 198
Directed Group Study


PLS 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates


PLS 290
Seminar

Topics of current interest related to Plant Sciences.
PLS 298
Group Study


PLS 299
Research


PMD 296
Neurodevelopment Group Study

Explore mechanisms that impact perinatal development of the cerebral cortex, and other cortical structures, under normal and pathological conditions.
PMD 410A
General & Endocrine Pathology

Pathologic mechanisms of human disease. Concepts of general pathologic processes, i.e., cell death, inflammation and neoplasia. Endocrine pathology in the context of clinical human disease. Emphasis on integration of clinical practice with gross and histologic images emphasizing team-based learning. 
PMI 129Y
One Health: Human, Animal & Environment Interfaces

Introduction to fundamentals, challenges, and opportunities in One Health  using local and global health case studies. Animal, human, and environmental health problems, along with tools and transdisciplinary approaches, will be introduced to foster innovative thinking that addresses complex issues.
PMI 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates


PMI 200
Research Foundations

Introduction to key components of graduate school success including mentor/mentee relationship issues, avoiding plagiarism, hypothesis development and experimental design, demystifying the grant writing process, understanding the NIH administrative structure, preparing for a non-academic career, and strategies to maintain a work-life balance.
PMI 201
Integrative Pathobiology Core I

Overview of molecular biology techniques, tissue structure and function, cell membrane pathology and cellular mechanisms of disease including cellular responses and adaptations to stress, cell cycle, cell death, cell biomechanics, vascular disturbances, and mechanisms of neoplasia and tumorigenesis.
PMI 202
Integrative Pathobiology Core II

The second required core course in the graduate group with topics in inflammation, host-pathogen interaction, regenerative medicine, integrative pathology and population and ecosystem health.
PMI 203
Experimental Design and Data Analysis in Pathobiology 

Follows two required core courses in, PMI 201 and 202,  for Ph.D. and M.S. students. Goal is to bridge gap between statistics and real-world pathobiology to increase students' skills and independence in experiment design and data analysis. 
PMR 100
Research Approaches to Disability & Rehabilitation 

Discussion and evaluation of research approaches to medical rehabilitation, community integration, and quality of life of disabled persons, with a focus on the progressive disabilities associated with neuromuscular diseases. Intent is to encourage interest in professions that serve the disabled community and increase awareness of rehabilitation goals.
PMR 421
Introduction to Sports Medicine

Introduction to basic concepts of Sports Medicine in Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation. Students attend afternoon clinic with Sports Medicine attending; attend lectures focusing on Sports Medicine topics. Students also eligible to cover sporting events with attending physicians where available.  
PMR 463
Pediatric Rehabilitation Medicine: Caring for Developmental Disabilities

Clerkship. Participate in the outpatient clinical care of children with a wide variety of medical conditions at Shriner's Hospitals for Children. Rotate through a variety of different outpatient clinics including cerebral palsy, neuromuscular disease, limb difference, spinal cord injury, spina bifida, brachial plexus, and sports medicine.
POL 001
American National Government

Survey of American national government, including the constitutional system, political culture, parties, elections, the presidency, Congress, and the courts.
POL 002
Introduction to Comparative Politics

Introduction to basic concepts in political analysis and application of them in comparative studies of selected countries. Coverage is given to cultural and other informal dimensions of politics as well as to more formal political and governmental structures.
POL 003
International Relations

International conflict and cooperation, including the Cold War, nuclear weapons, and new techniques for understanding international politics.
POL 004
Basic Concepts in Political Theory

Analysis of such concepts as the individual, community, liberty, equality, justice, and natural law as developed in the works of the major political philosophers. 
POL 005
Contemporary Problems of the American Political System

In-depth treatment of selected problems and issues of American politics, governmental institutions, and policies.
POL 007
Contemporary Issues in Law & Politics

Seminar focusing on the political dimensions of American law and institutions. Examines the role of courts in resolving contemporary issues of law and politics including abortion, capital punishment, and civil rights. 
POL 011A
America Decides: Who Will Win This Year's Election?

Survey of factors influencing presidential and congressional elections. Analysis of candidate nominations, campaign strategy, campaign finance, media coverage, and voter decision-making.
POL 011B
Citizen Lawmaking: Direct Democracy, Public Policy & Political Representation in America

Analysis of direct participation by citizens in the lawmaking process.  
POL 011C
Politics & Film

Survey of portrayals of politics and policy issues in moving pictures. Analysis of political processes, policy development, social mores, and historical periods as highlighted in Hollywood movies, television, and/or documentary films.
POL 011D
Political Persuasion

Examination of political influence and persuasion.   
POL 012A
Politics & Sports

Core issues in American and world politics through the lens of sports and the athletes who play them. Introduction of American civil rights movement, the Cold War, Middle East Tensions, and democratization.
POL 012B
Climate Change & Politics

Analysis of political institutions' response and adaptation to climate change.
POL 012Y
Data Visualization in the Social Sciences

Introduction to quantitative data across the social sciences (Communications, Political Science, Psychology, Sociology, and other disciplines). Transforming data, describing data, producing graphs, visual reasoning, and interpretations.
POL 051
Scientific Study of Politics

Introduction to the basic principles of the scientific study of politics. Research design and empirical analysis of data with applications to different methodological approaches and different substantive areas in political science. 
POL 145B
Politics in Israel

Introduction to the domestic politics of Israel in comparative perspective, including issues of internal cultural diversity, religion and politics, fragmentation of the political party system, and coalition governance.
POL 161
Ballots, Bucks, and Maps: The Rules of the Electoral Game in American Politics

Analysis of laws and court cases on the organization and administration of elections in the United States. Topics include campaign finance, redistricting, voting rights, race and representation, and comparisons with other democracies.
POL 161
Ballots, Bucks, & Maps: The Rules of the Electoral Game in American Politics

Analysis of laws and court cases on the organization and administration of elections in the United States. Topics include campaign finance, redistricting, voting rights, race & representation, and comparisons with other democracies.
POL 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates


POL 201
Urban Government & Politics

Survey and analysis of the literature in the field of local government and politics in the United States. Approaches to the study of political reform, local autonomy, community power, representation, expertise, service delivery, policy making and political change.
POL 202
American State Government & Politics

Survey and analysis of the literature in the field of state government, politics, and policy. Approaches to the study of the American states as political systems, including their governing institutions and processes and their role in the Federal system.
POL 203A
American Government: The Presidency

Thorough overview of the current research on political executives, with particular emphasis on the American presidency. Two principal goals: the development of important and innovative student research programs; and adequate preparation for qualifying examinations.
POL 203B
American Government: Congress

Thorough overview of the current research on Congress, with particular emphasis on political representation. Two principal goals: the development of important and innovative student research programs; and adequate preparation for qualifying examinations.
POL 203C
American Government: Courts

Survey and analysis of the literature in the field of American government with a focus on courts. Emphasis on the development and testing of theories of behavior and processes.
POL 207
Environmental Public Policy

Analysis of the interface between the world of academic reflection about ecological and environmental problems and the world of political action. Evaluation of alternative approaches to policy analysis and recommendation. Individual research, including field research, will parallel discussion of the literature.
POL 208
Policy Analysis

Social science techniques applied to public policy formation and evaluation.
POL 209
The American Political System

Analysis of selected theoretical and empirical issues posed by contemporary research in American government and politics.
POL 216
Qualitative Research Methods

Methodology for utilizing theoretically-oriented case studies and controlled comparison of a small number of cases to develop and test theories.  Examination of how the case study method compliments experimental, statistical and deductive modes of research.
POL 217
Social Choice Theory & Spatial Modeling

Introduction to social choice theory and formal spatial modeling including Arrows Theorem, the paradox of voting, cycling and agenda control. Focus on mastering modeling techniques as well as interpretation of classic works.
POL 218
Topics in Political Theory

Topics vary and may be the work of a single theorist, time period, or political concept, such as justice.
POL 219A
Political Theory Sequence

Survey of the great works in ancient and medieval political theory including such writers as Plato, Aristotle, Cicero, St. Augustine, Aquinas, Alfarabi and Marsilius. Discussions of various interpretations of these authors.
POL 219B
Political Theory Sequence

Survey of the great works in early modern to contemporary political theory including such writers as Machiavelli, Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, Marx, Mill, Nietzsche, and Rawls. Discussion of various interpretations of these authors.
POL 219C
Contemporary Political Theory

Survey of important works in contemporary political theory including such writers as Nietzsche, Heidegger, Arendt, Rawls, Nozick, Sandel.
POL 223
International Relations


POL 225
The International System

Analysis of the international system by means of theory formulation andintegration; critique of research designs; use of various techniques of data generation and analysis.
POL 226
Seminar in International Political Economy

Research in international political economy. Structure of the global economy, as well as specific dimensions of international economic relations, including trade, capital flows, global production structures, and migration.
POL 230
American Foreign Policy


POL 231
U.S. Political Culture & Foreign Relations

Relates U.S. political culture to formulation of foreign policy. Analyzes American ideological preferences in historical perspective, contemporary public opinion, decision making and implementation. Concludes by examining linkages between foreign policy behavior and democratic process.
POL 243
Comparative Institutional Change

Comparison of institutional changes in countries of the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe during the period of transition to democracy. Special attention to institutions of mass representation - electoral and party systems and national legislatures.
POL 260
Political Parties

Survey of selected topics in American and comparative parties.
POL 261
Political Behavior

Survey of selected topics in political behavior and public opinion.
POL 274
Political Economy

Politics of economic policy as reflected in taxation, spending and regulation; impact of prices, employment, and growth on political demands; government responses to economic conditions; electoral politics and the political business cycle.
POL 283
Organizational Behavior

Organizational behavior as it relates to public sector decision making.
POL 290B
Research in Political Theory

Special research seminar on problems and issues in the study of political theory.
POL 290C
Research in International Relations

Special research seminar on select problems and issues in the study of international relations.
POL 290E
Research in Political Parties, Politics, & Political Behavior

Special research seminar on selected problems and issues in the study of political parties, politics, and political behavior.
POL 290F
Research in Comparative Government & Policy

Special research seminar on select problems and issues in the study of comparative government and policy.
POL 298
Group Study


POL 299
Research


POL 299D
Research


POR 001
Elementary Portuguese

Introduction to Portuguese grammar and development of all language skills in a cultural context with special emphasis on communication.
POR 001A
Accelerated Intensive Elementary Portuguese 

Intended for students who wish to complete three quarters of Portuguese 1, 2, and 3.  
POR 031
Intermediate Portuguese for Spanish Speakers

Development of linguistic and learning skills required for Spanish-speaking students in upper division courses in Portuguese.
POR 031G
Portuguese for Spanish-Speaking Graduate Students

Intensive review of grammar and composition. Development of all language skills, but with emphasis on reading of modern texts, presentation/discussion, and writing on academic topics. Development on the following writing skills: analytical, argumentative, and creative.  
POR 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates

Independent study with professor for advanced undergraduate students, or honor thesis students.
PSC 001
General Psychology

Principles and basic concepts of psychology. The empirical study of individual behavior including perception, cognition, development, personality, social interactions and the biological underpinnings of behavior.  
PSC 001Y
General Psychology

Introduction to empirical approaches. Focus on perception, cognition, personality and social psychology, and biological aspects of behavior. 
PSC 012Y
Data Visualization in the Social Sciences

Introduction to quantitative data across the social sciences (Communications, Political Science, Psychology, Sociology, and other disciplines). Transforming data, describing data, producing graphs, visual reasoning, and interpretations. 
PSC 098
Directed Group Study

Primarily for lower division students.
PSC 099
Special Study for Lower Division Students


PSC 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates


PSC 206A
Theoretical Foundations: Research Methods in Psychology

Examines the philosophy and research practices underlying experimental psychology. Topics to be covered include philosophy of science/epistemology, research design, inference and bias in research, theory development, validity, the social context of research, and critical thinking about research.
PSC 206B
Research Methods in Psychology: Applications in Social-Personality Research

Overview of the research designs, assessment methods, and statistical procedure used by social-personality psychologists. Focus on the practical issues that arise when using each method in specific research contexts.
PSC 243
Social Cognition

Processes underlying the perception, memory, and judgment of social stimuli, the effects of social and affective factors on cognition, and the interpersonal consequences of those processes. Topics include automaticity/control, motivated cognition, person perception, stereotyping, attitudes, and persuasion.
PSC 244
Stereotyping, Prejudice, & Stigma

Examines the social psychological underpinnings of stereotyping, prejudice, and stigma, including sociocultural, motivational, and cognitive factors.
PSC 298
Group Study 


PSC 299
Research


PSY 092
Willow Clinic

Student run clinic for undergraduate students interested in learning about and meeting the unique health care needs for the homeless population.
PSY 419
Combined Family Medicine-Psychiatry Clerkship

Students rotate through the county Primary Care Clinic under the supervision of dual-boarded Psychiatry and Family Practice Faculty to provide medical care of indigent and uninsured patients as well as primary care for psychiatry patients.
PSY 422
Readings in Psychiatry

Independent reading of a selected topic in psychiatry. Supervision anddiscussion with a psychiatry faculty member.
PSY 430R
Rural PRIME Psychiatry Longitudinal Clerkship

Psychiatry Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
PTX 215
Electrophysiology Techniques & Applications

Broad scope of topics in electrophysiology techniques and applications.
PTX 290
Seminar

Current topics in pharmacology and toxicology.
PTX 290C
Advanced Research Conference

Provide credit for participation in and attendance at research conferences.
PTX 299
Research

Research with a faculty member in the Pharmacology & Toxicology Graduate Group.
PUL 464
Away Advanced Clerkship in Pulmonary Medicine

Away advanced clerkship in Pulmonary Medicine.
RDI 478
Advanced Clinical Clerkship Abdominal Imaging

Work with clinical Radiologists on abdominal and pelvic CT, MR, ultrasound, digital radiography, gastrointestinal and genitourinary procedures, image-guided intervention. Offered as a two-week rotation for third-year medical students and a two/four-week rotation for fourth-year medical students. 
RDI 479
Specialty Externship in Radiology

Externship provides in-depth exposure to one of a variety of sub-specialties in Radiology.  
REL 200D
Field Profile Seminar I & II

Individually guided research to survey the field of study, under the supervision of a faculty member. Four units total over two or more quarters are required by the end of the second year.
RON 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates: Research in Radiation Biology

Radiation Oncology is a unique discipline combining elements of clinical practice linked to complex physics based dosimetry and treatment planning. Included within this clinical environment is a strong basis in biology that underpins the clinical effectiveness of radiation treatment.
RON 464
Radiation Oncology Away Clerkship

Away Advanced Clerkship in Radiation Oncology.
RST 001
Survey of Religion 

Basic concepts introduced through readings of the primary religious literature. Discussion of central ideas (creation, history, law, prophecy, suffering, mysticism, asceticism, karma, reincarnation, moksha, etc.); readings from the Bible, Bhagavad Gita, the Koran, selections from Plato and early Buddhist writings.
RST 001A
Pilgrimage

Introduction to comparative religion, focusing on the theme of pilgrimage in different religious traditions.
RST 001B
Death & Afterlife

Introduction to comparative religion, focusing on the theme of death and the afterlife in different religious traditions.
RST 001C
Sacrifice

Introduction to comparative religion, focusing on the theme of sacrifice in different religious traditions.
RST 001D
Conversion

Introduction to comparative religion, focusing on the theme of conversion in different religious traditions.
RST 001E
Fundamentalism

Introduction to comparative religion, focusing on the idea of fundamentalism in different religious traditions.
RST 001F
Religion Today

Introduction to comparative religion, focusing on different religious traditions in the contemporary world.
RST 001G
Myth, Ritual, & Symbolism

Myths, rituals and religious symbols found in a variety of religious traditions including examples from ancient and contemporary religious life. Variety of religious phenomena; validity of different approaches to the study of religion.
RST 001H
Sex, Marriage, & Divorce in Medieval & Modern Society

Methods used in the study of religion, focusing on a particular theme in a number of religious traditions.
RST 001J
Music, Voice, & the Word

Exploration of relation between religion and musical traditions in various cultures. Investigation of ways music, vocal performance and sound production reflect and shape modern religious sensibilities. Special attention to gender, ethnicity, race, class, nationalism, secularism and mass media.
RST 005
Comparative Religion

Comparative Religion based on rotating topics such as Dreams and Revelations, Evil, Prophecy, Salvation, and Crime and Punishment.  
RST 006
Introduction to Health Sciences & the Humanities

Humanities in the health sciences focusing on illness, the practice of medicine, and the role of culture in biomedical research.  
RST 010
Contemporary Ethical Issues

Presents challenging, contemporary ethical issues from a multi-cultural perspective. Rotating topics will include Ethical Eating, Capital Punishment, Euthanasia, Poverty, and Animal Rights.
RST 011
Ethical Eating

Introduction to the complex and varied ethical, religious, and cultural meanings that food has had across the centuries and globe. 
RST 012
Emergence of Judaism, Christianity & Islam

History of religion in the ancient Near East and Mediterranean, from the Persian period through the rise of Islam. Emphasis on historical and social contexts of the formation of new traditions, in particular Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. 
RST 015Y
Reading War/Fighting War

Introduction to both classic religious texts about war and a set of actual scenarios drawn from the experience and training of soldiers in recent military conflicts.
RST 021
The Bible & Its Interpreters 

Introduction to the Hebrew Bible (Old Testament): key narratives and themes (creation, flood, prophecy, justice, sexuality, etc.); origins in Ancient Israel; diverse ways it has been interpreted in Jewish and Christian communities.
RST 023
Introduction to Judaism

Introduction to the study of religion using examples from the rituals, art and holy texts of Judaism. No prior knowledge of either Judaism or the study of religion is necessary.
RST 030
Religions of South Asia

Introduction to South Asian religions, including Hinduism, Buddhism, Islam, Jainism and Sikhism. Traces historical developments from Vedic texts and their ascetic reformulation by sages such as Yajnavalkya, Siddhartha Gautama, and Mahavira into our global present.
RST 031
Introduction to Jainism

Introduction to topics central to Jain tradition through critical, historical and ethical perspectives. 
RST 032
History of Yoga

History of yoga from antiquity to its most recent formulation in American popular and consumer culture.
RST 033
Magic & Demons in South Asia

Exploration of magic, demons, and other powers in South Asian religions from the ancient to the modern periods. 
RST 040
New Testament

New Testament literature from critical, historical, and theologicalperspectives.
RST 042
Religion & Science Fiction

Representations of actual and fictional religious movements in science fiction and fantasy writing and film. Examination of: the characteristics of religion and religiosity in fictional religious movements; the relationship between religion, science, and technology in modern speculative fiction.
RST 045
Christianity

Major concepts and practices in the Christian tradition. Survey of the history of Christianity and Christian expansion from antiquity to modern times. Pays particular attention to Christianity in China, India, Africa, the Middle East, and Latin America.
RST 060
Introduction to Islam

Introduction to topics central to the Islamic tradition. Muhammad, the Qur'an, Islamic law, theology, philosophy, cosmology, worship, and mysticism. Race and gender in Islam, Islamic revival, and varying experiences of Islam in different historical and cultural settings.
RST 065C
The Qur'an & Its Interpretation

The Qur'an, its history, its various functions in the lives of Muslims, and its different interpretations. Quranic themes such as God and humankind, nature and revelation, eschatology and Satan. Islam and other religions; women, gender, and sexuality.
RST 066
The Song of God: The Bhagavad Gita

The Bhagavad Gita, its history and reception, and its significance in the lives of Hindus. Themes explored include Hindu theories of god, self, war, peace, duty, and action.
RST 067
Modern Hinduism

Historical survey of modern Hinduism from the early-19th century to the present. Topics include Rammohun Roy, Sir William Jones, and Mahatma Gandhi, nationalism, post-colonialism and diasporic religion.
RST 068
Hinduism

Hindu tradition from ancient to modern times.  Multiplicity of religious forms within Hinduism with mention of Jainism, Buddhism, and Sikhism and their relation to the mainstream of Hindu religion.
RST 069
Introduction to Hindu Mythology

Survey of the major narrative traditions within Hinduism, including epic literature and local stories in oral, textual, visual and performative forms. 
RST 070
Religion & Language

Basic toolkit for studying religious discourse in a variety of traditions. Concentration on the sacred and profane, the wondrous and ordinary, and the mystical and reasonable.
RST 075
Introduction to Chinese Philosophy 

Introduction to Chinese philosophy from classical pre-modern times; emphasis on basic concepts and their impact on social conduct; the Age of Philosophers, the Han synthesis, the medieval Buddhist contribution.
RST 080
Religion, Gender, Sexuality

Constructions of gender and sexuality within one or more religious traditions, pre-modern and modern.  Emphasis on the interaction between religious, medical, and ethical definitions of the human body and sexual behavior.
RST 100
Study of Religion: Issues & Methods

Principal issues and methods of Religious Studies and associated fields.
RST 104
Christianity 1450-1700

History of  Reformation conflicts over the authority of scripture, the nature of man and the universe, and the basis of morality with the goal of understanding how these conflicts laid the foundation for the modern world. 
RST 105
Christianity & Modernity, 1700-1920

Reaction of Christian critics and apologists to the profound cultural and scientific transformations resulting from the Scientific Revolution, the Enlightenment, and the advent of the modern critical study of religion.
RST 106
Christianity in the Contemporary World

Christianity in the 20th and 21st centuries. Relationship of Christianity to globalization, industrialization, mass media, and the contemporary secular state. Focus on Christianity in America and developing nations, and on the relationship of established Christian institutions to new Christian movements.
RST 111
Persuasion & Conviction in Religious Tradition

Selected topics in religious argument. Familiarizes students with the discourse structures of religious persuasion and enables them to perform analysis of such texts. Covers argument styles and structures used in ethics, theology, and preaching. 
RST 120
Religion, Magic & Science

Religion, magic, and science from the middle ages to the present. Contrast between modern scientific methodology and religious and magical thinking.
RST 123
Sex & Gender in the Bible

Gender and sexuality in the Bible and its interpretation in Judaism and Christianity. Femininity and masculinity; gender roles; homosexuality; sexual violence. Historical origins in the ancient world; influence on contemporary views.
RST 136
Topics in Jainism

Thematic study of specific periods, literary movements, sects and important figures within Jainism from a ranges of disciplinary perspectives. 
RST 137
Topics in Buddhism

Thematic exploration of historic developments, periods, regions and sects in Buddhism from an interdisciplinary perspective.
RST 139
Topics in Hinduism

Thematic study of specific periods, movements, leaders, regions, ethics or philosophies within Hinduism from an interdisciplinary perspective.
RST 152
Justice, Equity, & Privacy in Medical Humanities

Global issues of justice, equity, and fairness in healthcare and biomedical research. Emphasis on issues of race, gender, paternalism, and genetic privacy. Texts include scholarly articles, fiction, and film. 
RST 154
The Hindu Temple

Comparative history of architecture and symbolism of the Hindu Temple in India, Southeast Asia and the United States. Attention to the temple as expression of religious knowledge, political authority, and cultural heritage through the lens of colonialism and postcolonialism.
RST 155A
Bhakti: Indian Devotional Traditions to 1200 CE

Exploration of Indian devotional traditions through literary, visual, and performance culture. Emphasis on period up to 1200 CE in southern India.
RST 157
Hindu Women & Goddesses

Hindu goddesses and the religious lives of Hindu women in India and the diaspora. 
RST 158
The Ramayana

Exploration of the Indian epic, Ramayana, through the lens of literature, performance, and visual art. Emphasis on the text's diversity and its contemporary global relevance. Topics include Ramayanas in Southeast Asia, and in various South Asian diaspora communities. 
RST 159
The Mahabharata

Survey of the Indian epic, the Mahabharata, through textual, oral, and visual culture. 
RST 161
Modern Islam

Response of Islam to modernity: secularism, reformism, fundamentalism. Islam and imperialism, women, media and immigration. Islamic modernism, political Islam, Islam in Europe and America.
RST 161B
Modern Islam: Authority & Tradition In Process

Survey of Islamic thought, social organization, politics from 18th century through present. Focus on changing notations of moral authority and tradition. Concentration on Middle East and South Asia with sustained treatment of North American engagements with the Islamic world.
RST 165
Islam in Asia

Islam as a lived religion in the Indian sub-continent, Central Asia, China, and Southeast Asia.  Emphasis is on primary sources studied comparatively and historically.
RST 166
Religion & Media in the Arab World

Exploration of the role and experience of media technologies in the Arab world. Study of digital and electronic media as well as alternative media practices. Investigation of new trends in political activism and identity formation.
RST 167
Iraq

Origins, causes and ethical challenges of conditions in Iraq; larger historical, cultural and ethical dimensions of mass violence, war, liberation, neocolonialism, terrorism and resistance.
RST 170
Buddhism

Buddhism in its pan-Asian manifestations, from its beginning in India to its development in Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia, Central Asia, China and Japan; teachings and practices, socio-political and cultural impact.  
RST 171
Buddhist Art

A historical survey of Buddhist art in relation to the development of Buddhist doctrine and philosophy.
RST 172
Ch'an (Zen) Buddhism

Doctrines and methods of the Ch'an Buddhism, both ancient and modern. Review of ritual techniques, including meditation.
RST 180
Popular Religious Art in India

Survey of Indian popular religious art in prints, trade labels, comics and photographs.
RST 194HA
Special Study for Honors Students

Guided research, under the direction of a faculty member approved by the Program Director, leading to a senior honors thesis on a religious studies topic.
RST 194HB
Special Study for Honors Students

Guided research, under the direction of a faculty member approved by the Program Director, leading to a senior honors thesis on a religious studies topic.
RST 205
Religion & Media

Many communities are finding global media technologies useful for religious practice. Examines how religious revitalization is historically situated. Phenomenological approach will enable students to situate media and religion within the social and material world of practitioners.
RST 212
Religion & Violence

Comparative and critical study of the ideological, cultural, and theological relationship between forms of violence and religion and religious practice.  
RST 299
Directed Research


RUS 001
Elementary Russian

Introduction to Russian grammar and development of all language skills in a cultural context with special emphasis on communication. 
RUS 001A
Accelerated Intensive Elementary Russian

Special 12-week accelerated, summer session intensive combining the work of RUS 001, RUS 002, and RUS 003. Introduction to Russian grammar and development of all language skills in a cultural context with emphasis on communication.
RUS 133
Post-Soviet Literature

Major authors and trends in Russian literature in post-1991 period. Discussion of impact of economic, social, and cultural turmoil of post-Soviet period on literary marketplace. Analysis of development of literary postmodernism in Russia.
RUS 140
Dostoevsky (in English)

Reading and analysis of Dostoevskys principal works such as Crime and Punishment, The Idiot, The Brothers Karamazov, and The Diary. Study of social and political views as reflected in Dostoevskys works.
RUS 141
Tolstoy (in English)

Study of Leo Tolstoy's literary evolution and moral quest. Readings include his Confession, a major novel such as War and Peace or Anna Karenina, and representative shorter fiction.
RUS 142
Women in Russian Culture

Study of the representation of women in contemporary Russian fiction and film. Exploration of issues such as family dynamics/motherhood, sexuality, work, and women's relationship to the state. Offered in English.
RUS 143
Chekhov (in English)

Examination of Chekhov's short stories and major plays, such as The Seagull, Uncle Vanya, The Three Sisters, The Cherry Orchard, and Ivanov, in the broader cultural context of European and Russian fin de siecle. 
RUS 150
Russian Culture

Study of Russian culture in 19th and 20th centuries. Brief introduction of the beginnings up to 19th century. Russian art, music, philosophy, church, traditions, and daily life. Knowledge of Russian not required. 
SAF 090
SA & FS Seminar

Introductory or survey topics within Sustainable Agriculture & Food Systems.
SAS 001
Critical Inquiry into Contemporary Issues

Contemporary issues, including global population trends, economic and environmental changes, cultural diversity and biodiversity, nutrition and food safety, fiber and textiles, changing consumer cultures. Inquiry processes emphasize ethics, multiple disciplines, and multiple perspectives.
SAS 002
Feeding the World: Influences on the Global Food Supply

Scientific principles and dynamic interactions involved in food production, food processing, nutrition, and agribusiness.  Physical, biological and social science issues influencing the availability and safety of the food supply worldwide.  
SAS 002V
Feeding the World: Influences on the Global Food Supply

Scientific principles and dynamic interactions involved in food production, food processing, nutrition, and agribusiness. Physical, biological and social science issues influencing the availability and safety of the food supply worldwide.
SAS 003
Science, Technology & Society

Impact of developments in science and technology on the individual in society and how economics, politics, culture and values affect technological development.
SAS 004
Water in Popular Culture

Importance of water in many aspects of society as revealed through a survey of its depictions in film.
SAS 005
Pathways to Discovery: Science & Society

Highlights a current issue and/or controversy found in contemporary society and looks at how this problem impacts and is affected by the physical, social and biological sciences. Topics vary.
SAS 007
Terrorism & War

Exploration of terrorism and war from science and social sciences perspectives. Terrorist cells and groups; biological, chemical, nuclear, and environmental terrorism; intelligence gathering and espionage; military strategy; genocide; epochal wars; clash of civilizations; nation building; and future global scenarios.
SAS 007V
Terrorism & War

Terrorism and war from science and social sciences perspectives: terrorism (terrorist cells, WMD's, religious extremism), warfare (military strategy, genocide), and statecraft (diplomacy, clash of civilizations, epochal wars).
SAS 008
Water Quality at Risk

Natural and human threats to water quality. Balance of science and policy in all aspects of attaining, maintaining, and managing water quality, water contamination. Decoding popular media coverage of water quality and water contamination.
SAS 009
Crisis in the Environment

Explores contemporary environmental issues by examining the causes, effects and solutions to a wide range of environmental problems facing the global ecosystem. Integrated discussion of political, societal and economic impact linkages with environmental problems. May be taught abroad.
SAS 010
Water, Power, Society

Water resources issues. How water has been used to gain and wield socio-political power. Water resources development in California  related to current and future sustainability of water quantity and quality. Roles of science and policy in solving water problems. 
SAS 011
California Geography

Introduction to cultural/societal patterns of California and their relationship to natural resources, biomes,geomorphology, and physiography. Focus on diversity of California's environments and their impacts on and alterations by human activities. Environmental issues in the State.
SAS 013
Disease & Society

Introduction to the concept of disease, the societal and personal impacts of past, present and future diseases, and the science behind disease discoveries, causes, evolution, diagnosis, treatment, and prevention.
SAS 014
Forests & Society

Sociology, natural history and current issues of the world's forests. Application of scientific principles in outdoor laboratories and on-campus field trips.
SAS 016
Soil, Water, & Civilizations

Exploring past civilizations and examining how management of soil, water, and natural resources allowed them to flourish, decline, or perhaps fail. Important issues include agricultural practices, deforestation, water quality, and land management.
SAS 018
GIS & Society

Geographic Information Systems (GIS) as a spatial technology and a tool for change in society. Evaluate physical, biological and social impact of GIS in the context of case studies such as land, water and community planning.
SAS 020
Genetics & Society

Basic concepts of genetics, modern methods of biotechnology, the process of scientific discovery and the public perception of the process; present and future impact of genetics on society.  
SAS 025
Global Climate Change: Convergence of Biological, Geophysical, & Social Sciences

Causes of global climate change and the biological, geophysical, and social consequences of such change. Methods used by different scientists for predicting future events. Complexity of global affairs. Decision making under uncertainty.
SAS 025V
Global Climate Change: Convergence of Biological, Geophysical, & Social Sciences

Causes of global climate change and the biological, geophysical, and social consequences of such change. Methods used by different scientists for predicting future events. Complexity of global affairs. Decision making under uncertainty.
SAS 030
Mushrooms, Molds, & Society

Fungi as organisms with which humans interact daily, societal issues arising from these interactions. Fungi in medicine, religion, agriculture, and industry, as well as cultural perceptions of fungi.
SAS 035
Germs: The Good, the Bad, & the Ugly

Impact of microorganisms on Earth, Humans and Society. Historical, scientific, and contemporary issues dealing with microbes on natural and built environments.
SAS 040
Photography: Bridging Art & Science

Photography is used to explore the common ground between art and science. Photographic processes, creativity and aesthetics, chaos and order, principles of space, time and light. Photographic interpretation and documentation of the natural world. Camera required.
SAS 041
Understanding Performance: Appreciation of Modern Theatre, Dance, Film & Performance Art for the Humanities & Sciences

Relevance of theatre and performance to modern culture, science and society. Approaches to theatre/dance/media/performance art, integrated into Mondavi Centre for the Arts and Theatre and Dance Department programs.
SAS 042
Earth, Water, Science, Song

Fusion of water and soil science with performing arts. Creative communication of scientific concepts and facts through exercises in song writing and poetry. Design, discuss and conduct public performances related to the functioning of the natural world.
SAS 043
Energy, Materials, & Design Over Time

Global history of design across time, viewed through the lens of the effects of the creation and discovery of new energy sources, processes, and materials on design. 
SAS 070A
Genetic Engineering in Medicine, Agriculture, & Law

Historical and scientific study of the impact of genetic engineering in medicine, agriculture, and law, including examination of social, ethical, and legal issues raised. Offered in a distance-learning format.
SAS 090B
Observing & Writing in Biology 

Observe the interactions between microscopic organisms, conduct simple laboratory experiments, describe and analyze observations and discuss scientific observations and writing.
SAS 090E
Biotechnology-a New Era, a New Struggle

Animal biotechnology and its applications. Discussion topics include potential societal impacts of various technologies, factors shaping public opinion, and ethical and moral questions arising from new biotechnology applications.  
SAS 090F
Food Distribution in a Hungry World

The biological, technological, environmental, and socioeconomic factors related to food distribution systems at local, regional, national, and international levels. The potential for increasing world food supply by reducing losses between harvest and consumption. 
SAS 090G
Science, Society & the Environment  

Contemporary environmental issues, scientific approaches to addressing these issues, and accompanying societal and ethical considerations.
SAS 109
Environmental Change, Disease & Public Health

Analysis of environmental changes from pre-history to the present and their influence on disease distribution, virulence and public health. Focus on critical study of many human-driven environmental changes and the accelerated transformation/spread of pathogens under globalization.
SAS 121
Global Poverty: Critical Thinking & Taking Action

Social science and engineering analysis of causes and effects of world poverty and of policies to reduce it via economic growth, foreign aid, and community-level interventions; e.g., in potable water, sanitation, lighting, small scale energy, irrigation, health and microfinance.  
SOC 001
Introduction to Sociology

Principles and basic concepts of sociology. The study of groups, culture, collective behavior, classes and caste, community and ecology, role, status, and personality.
SOC 002
Self & Society

Exploration of how self and identity are formed and transformed by socialization and social interaction in relation to roles, groups, institutions, power, and social change. Consideration of how people make decisions, fall in love, and come to blows.
SOC 003
Social Problems

General sociological consideration of contemporary social problems in relation to sociocultural change and programs for improvement.
SOC 004
Immigration & Opportunity

Social and demographic analysis of immigration: motives and experiences of immigrants; immigration and social mobility; immigration, assimilation, and social change; multicultural societies. Detailed study of immigration into the U.S., with comparative studies of Europe, Australia, and other host countries.
SOC 005
Global Social Change: An Introduction to Macrosociology

Introduction to change and diversity in world history, including the United States. Examines population and family, technological change and economic development, power and status, culture and identity.
SOC 006
Health & Illness

Introduction to the sociology of health and illness, including social determinants of health, social inequalities in health/health disparities, social construction of health, the organization of health care, and the politics of health care reform.
SOC 011
Sociology of Labor & Employment

Labor and employment issues in the contemporary United States with some use of historical and comparative materials. Topics include strategies pursued by employers and employees, labor market discrimination and the role of social policies in shaping labor markets.  
SOC 012Y
Data Visualization in the Social Sciences

Introduction to quantitative data across the social sciences (Communications, Political Science, Psychology, Sociology, and other disciplines). Transforming data, describing data, producing graphs, visual reasoning, and interpretations.
SOC 025
Sociology of Popular Culture

Social mechanisms that shape modern popular culture. High, folk, and mass culture: historical emergence of popular culture. Mass media, commercialization, ideology and cultural styles. Theories and methods for analyzing cultural expressions in pop music, street art, film, television, and advertising.
SOC 030A
Intercultural Relations in Multicultural Societies

Macro-structural analysis of contemporary multicultural societies; immigration and assimilation in comparative perspective; social construction of racial and ethnic group identities; ethnicity and gender; group conflict and cooperation; controversies surrounding multiculturalism. First course in a two-course Multicultural Immersion Program.
SOC 046A
Introduction to Social Research

Examination of the methodological problems of social research. Selectionand definition of problems of investigation, data-gathering techniques, and sampling.
SOC 046B
Introduction to Social Research

Data-analysis techniques, measurement, scaling, multivariate analysis, and quantitative measures of association.
SOC 123
American Society

The demographic and social structure of American society and population, with emphasis on ethnic and class groups as bases for political and economic interest. Attention to selected current social controversies.
SOC 123
American Society

The demographic and social structure of American society and population, with emphasis on ethnic and class groups as bases for political and economic interest. Attention to selected current social controversies.
SOC 225
Cultural Sociology 

Explores the varied ways in which culture is understood in the social sciences and the research questions that follow from contrasting viewpoints. The approach is historically informed and focused on changing cultural forms in relation to industrialization and post-modernism.
SOC 227
Sociology of Reproduction

Recent social science scholarship in such areas as teenage pregnancy,family planning, abortion, adoption, AIDS, and new reproductive technologies; focus on the current situation in the United States.
SOC 230
Ethnic (Race) Relations

Advanced study of the determinants of ethnic groupings and their interrelationships. Major theme will be the patterns of ethnic stratification and causes of ethnic conflict. Specific focus upon dominance and resistance to dominance. Influence of social science research.
SOC 233
Gender, Culture, & Local/Global Transformation

Focus on critical approach to women and development; analyze local transformations with global connections within specific cultural contexts. Covers theory, methodological issues, and relationship between theory and practice.
SOC 243
Urban Society

Broad overview of the issues and concerns of the field of urban sociology. Special emphasis on the human experience of urban living in contemporary, cross-cultural or historical settings.
SOC 248
Social Movements

Analysis of current issues in and contributions to the study of collective behavior and social movements; particular focus upon the strategies and tactics of social movements.
SOC 254
Sociology of Health & Illness

Sociological perspectives and methods on the study of health and illness. Select topics for supervised research. Research paper required.
SOC 265A
Classical Sociological Theory

Introduces graduate students to the work of the main classical thinkers in the tradition of social theory, such as Marx, Durkheim, Weber, Simmel, Freud, G.H. Mead, and Parsons, locating them within the historical,cultural,and philosophical milieu in which their ideas originated.
SOC 280
Organizations & Institutions

Theory of formal organizations and bureaucracy. Methods of research in organizational and institutional studies. Historical and comparative analysis of political, religious, educational, military, and economic structure.
SOC 290
Seminar


SPA 001
Elementary Spanish

Introduction to Spanish grammar and development of all language skills in a cultural context with special emphasis on communication.  
SPA 001A
Accelerated Intensive Elementary Spanish

Introduction to Spanish grammar and development of all language skills in a cultural context with emphasis on communication. Special 12-week accelerated, intensive summer session combining the work of SPA 001, SPA 002 and SPA 003.
SPA 001S
Elementary Spanish

Introduction to Spanish grammar and development of all language skills in a cultural context with special emphasis on communication. May be taught abroad in a Spanish speaking country under the supervision of a UC Davis faculty/lecturer.
SPA 001Y
Elementary Spanish

Introduction to Spanish grammar and development of all language skills in a cultural context with special emphasis on communication.
SPA 143
Spanish Art

Spanish art and the different historical, sociological and political manifestations that frame it. History of art, including Paleolithic, Roman, Visigothic, Romanesque, Goth, Renaissance, Baroque, Neoclassic and Contemporary art. May be taught abroad.
SPA 147
Anglos, Latinos & the Spanish Black Legend: Origins & Educational Implications of Anti-Hispanic Prejudice

Examination of anti-Hispanic prejudice in the United States focusing on the "Black Legend," a 16th-century, anti-Spanish myth underpinning the doctrine of "Manifest Destiny." Exploration of the Legend's presence in contemporary American society through interviews and analysis of school textbooks.
SPA 149
Latin-American Literature in Translation

Reading, lectures and discussions in English of works by Borges, Cortázar, Fuentes, García Márquez, Paz and others. 
SPA 179
Science & Politics of the Human Body in the Spanish-Speaking World

Interaction between the interpretations of scientific ideas, philosophical issues, and politics concerning the human body in the Spanish- speaking world through different historical periods.
SPA 179Y
Science & Politics of the Human Body in the Spanish-Speaking World

Interaction between the interpretations of scientific ideas, philosophical issues, and politics concerning the human body in the Spanish-speaking world through different historical periods.
SPA 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates

Special study of a topic or an author to be determined in consultation with an individual faculty member. May be taught abroad.
SPA 203
Research Methodologies

Introduction to the range of scholarly research methodologies currently being realized in Spanish linguistics, literary and cultural studies: archival research, textual analysis, discourse analysis, statistics for linguistics, etc.; introduction to scholarly writing (MLA style) and scholarly publishing.
SPA 230
Topics in Latin American Cultural Studies

Discussion of select contemporary theoretical debates in Latin American Cultural Studies.  Application of critical questions to the analysis of cultural texts.
SPA 231
Interamerican Studies

Survey of methodologies of investigation for crosscultural or comparative projects in the geographical context of the Americas.  Focus on particular problems of language, discipline, national definitions, and global hierarchies of knowledge that complicate such projects.  Readings of interamerican cultural texts.
SPA 255
Spanish Literature of the Early Renaissance

Spanish Literature, 1450-1550, with emphasis on La Celestina. (Former SPA 229.)
SPA 280
Latin American Short Story

Works by major writers with emphasis on 20th-century authors such as Quiroga, Borges, García Márquez, Cortázar, and Rulfo. (Former SPA 243).
SPA 283
New Directions in Latin American Poetry

New trends in Latin American poetry.
SPA 284
The Latin American Essay

Major Latin American essayists from Sarmiento to contemporary essayists.
SPA 291
Foreign Language Learning in the Classroom

Overview of approaches to university-level foreign language instruction and the theoretical notions underlying current trends in classroom practices across commonly taught foreign languages.
SPA 299
Research


SPH 102
Introduction to Human Epidemiology

Practice of epidemiology as it relates to human populations. Content is fundamental to the Public Health minor and a required core course.
SPH 103
Introduction to Health Economics, Services, Policy, Administration & Management

American health care system and how public health leaders, administrators, and researchers can make effective contributions to the populations served. 
SPH 104
Globalization & Health: Evidence & Policies

Provides an overview of the evidence on the multiple effects of globalization policies on health.
SPH 113
Health Disparities in the U.S.

Introduction to the principles and practice of health disparities research.
SPH 132
Health Issues Confronting Asian Americans & Pacific Islanders

Health issues confronting Asian Americans & Pacific Islanders.
SPH 160
General Health Education & Prevention

Topics include addiction, substance abuse/prevention, nutrition, stress management, physical fitness, body image, reproductive anatomy & physiology, contraceptive options, safer sex, sexual health, healthy relationships, and other general wellness/health promotion topics. Practice in peer counseling and outreach presentations.
SPH 204
Globalization & Health: Evidence & Policies

Provides an overview of the evidence on the multiple effects of globalization policies on health.
SPH 209
History of Epidemiology in Public Health

Introduction to the history of epidemiology in solving major public health problems. Original historical articles will be read/discussed. Topics may include: infectious disease, accidents/adverse events, nutritional deficiencies, community vaccination trials, occupational exposures, cancer, birth defects, cardiovascular disease, and smoking.
SPH 233
Persuasive Technologies for Health

Theorizing, designing and evaluating ethical technology-based health communication interventions. Uses of social media, mobile communication apps, wearable devices, computer-generated tailored messages, educational games, and computational approaches in health promotion and healthcare delivery.
SPH 244
Introduction to Medical Statistics

Introduction to statistical methods and software in clinical, laboratory and population medicine. Graphical and tabular presentation of data, probability, binomial, Poisson, normal, t-, F-, and Chi-square distributions, elementary nonparametric methods, simple linear regression and correlation, life tables.
SPH 276
Critical Assessment in Health Policy & Economics

Aims to develop critical reading skills of the health policy and health economics literature, mainly following the microeconomic paradigm and analytical techniques. Some basic concepts of micro economic theory will be explained. 
SPH 496
Current Issues in Public Health

Topical issues in public health.  Speakers from the local public health community address issues such as disease control programs, access to care. 
SSC 010
Soils in Our Environment

Soils in our global ecosystem; soils as natural bodies formed by interactive environmental processes; soil response to use and management; sustainable use of soil resources; role of soils in  agricultural and environmental issues; role of soils in our daily lives.
STA 220
Data & Web Technologies for Data Analysis

Essentials of using relational databases and SQL. Processing data in blocks. Scraping Web pages and using Web services/APIs. Basics of text mining. Interactive data visualization with Web technologies. Computational data workflow and best practices. Statistical Methods.
STA 401
Methods in Statistical Consulting

Introduction to consulting, in-class consulting as a group, statistical consulting with clients, and in-class discussion of consulting problems. Clients are drawn from a pool of University clients.
STH 296
Theory & Society Journal Editorial Workshop

Reading and offering workshop critiques of papers submitted for publication. Reading and discussion of other relevant work in history and the social science.
STS 001
Introduction to Science, Technology & Medicine Studies

History, philosophy, sociology, politics, and cultural studies of science, technology, and medicine. Emphasis on a broad range of perspectives.
STS 002
Introduction to the History of Science & Technology

Introduction to topics and methods of the history of science and technology. Emphasis on understanding the role of science and technology in the modern world through a long-term historical perspective.
STS 011
Science on Trial: Law, Science, & Technology in the United States

Relationships among law, technology, and science. Scientific evidence and testimony, biology education, patenting, and sterilization.
STS 016
Sex, Science, & Society

Survey of the relationship between sex, science, and society in the history of the modern world. Emphasis on the development of scientific ideas about the human body against broader social, cultural, and political trends and from a global viewpoint. 
STS 032
Drugs, Science & Culture

Drugs, politics, science, society in a cultural perspective: emphasis on roles of science, government and the media in shifting attitudes toward alcohol, marijuana, Prozac and other pharmaceuticals; drug laws, war on drugs and global trade in sugar, opium, cocaine.
STS 040A
Media History 1, Gutenberg to Oppenheimer

History of Media to 1945, with particular focus on mechanically reproduced mass media technologies including the printing press, the newspaper, photography, cinema, radio and early computing technology. Analysis of inter-related cultural and political topics.
STS 050
Ancient Science

Study of science in ancient Greece and Rome; consideration of its social context; concentration on the basic concepts of physics the world of medicine and biology the history of mathematics and the practices of astronomy astrology and meteorology.
STS 051
Ancient Medicine

Medicine in ancient Greece and Rome; physiological conceptions of the body within scientific and social frameworks; exploration of sanitation technology and health in antiquity; medical treatment of the female body; medicine and the economy.
STS 099
Special Study for Undergraduates


STS 101
Introduction to Data Studies

Introduction to basic data science concepts, defining problems, clarifying questions, identifying stakeholders, caring for and cleaning data, interviewing techniques, structuring presentations, use of Excel for data problems.
STS 110
Computing, Data, & Law in the United States

Introduction to the problems in American law and policy borne out of the creation and use of information technologies. Topics include intellectual property, corporate law, privacy, and emerging problems surrounding big data.
STS 112
Visualizing Society with Data

Analysis and visualization of historical and contemporary data about populations and societies using R. Critical exploration of visual communication of information about people over time and critical assessment of role of data collection and analysis in societies.
STS 113
Business & Technology in the United States: From Electricity to E-Commerce

Historical introduction to the joint development of business and technology in the United States from the late-19th century to the present day.
STS 114
The Global Information Age

Introduction to the global spread of information technologies like computers and smartphones. Special focus on their social, cultural, and commercial impact. 
STS 115
Data Sense & Exploration: Critical Storytelling with Analysis

Data science and the communication of data insights through critical storytelling. Attention to the historical and social contexts of data analysis, emphasizing narrative, visualization, and exploration. Introduction to the R computing environment for data analysis.
STS 120
Religion, Magic & Science

Religion, magic, and science from the middle ages to the present. Contrast between modern scientific methodology and religious and magical thinking.
STS 122
Health & Medical Technologies

Critical/historical examination of medical technologies: imaging, pharmaceuticals, genetics, implants/devices. Exploration of mutually constitutive relationship between health, medical technologies, social difference (race/gender/class/sexuality).
STS 150
Gender & Science

Interdisciplinary approach to the relations between gender and science. Topics include the biological and cultural construction of sexual difference, the role of women as practitioners of science, and feminist approaches to science.
STS 151
Media Theory

Critical and theoretical approaches to the emergence of new technologies since the invention of photography. Examine various approaches to media (formalist, semiotic, structuralist, Frankfurt School, cybernetics, visual and gamer theory).
STS 152
Sounding Data: Critical Approaches to Sonification

Critical and creative approaches to auditory data and display in art, science, and technology. Practical introduction to sonification techniques through sound studies and sensory ethnography. Heuristic listening and collaborative sound design.
STS 160
Ghosts of the Machine: How Technology Rewires our Senses

Historical, aesthetic and critical approaches to how information technologies produced ghost effects or a sense of terror in response to new media like the photograph, gramophone, film, typewriter, computer, Turing Machine. Focus on technological media transforms sense perception.
STS 163
History of Communication Technologies

History of communication technologies from the late Middle Ages to the 20th century. Questions of technology, knowledge, power and culture. Particular attention to questions about information and truth.
STS 165
Built Environments

Built environments, which are designed to support forms of life.  Their role as carriers of cultural memory and in turning knowledge of nature into social assets. Historical constellations of knowledge, social order, and power.
STS 200
Theories & Methods in Science & Technology Studies

Theories and methods of Science & Technology Studies as a field of critical and empirical scholarship, and examination of various contexts in which STS has emerged worldwide.
STS 205
Contemporary Issues in Science & Technology Studies

Recent topics, debates, and innovative methods in Science & Technology Studies. Issues may include the governance of technoscience, science and media, data studies, indigenous knowledge, science and globalization, citizen science, new and emerging technologies.
STS 210
Digital Technologies: History & Theory

Introduction to the history and theory of digital technologies. Human-machine interaction, cybernetics, software studies, and global networking.
SUR 099
Cardiovascular Tissue Engineering Research

Multidisciplinary research in cardiovascular tissue engineering and regeneration for acquired and congenital cardiovascular disease.
TCS 005
Media Archaeology

Evolution of media technologies and practices beginning in the 19th Century as they relate to contemporary digital arts practices.   Special focus on the reconstruction of the social and artistic possibilities of lost and obsolete media technologies.
TCS 005
Media Archaeology

Evolution of media technologies and practices beginning in the 19th Century as they relate to contemporary digital arts practices.   Special focus on the reconstruction of the social and artistic possibilities of lost and obsolete media technologies.
TCS 007A
Technocultural Workshop: Digital Imaging 

Workshops in technocultural digital skills; Digital Imaging.
TCS 007B
Technocultural Workshop: Digital Video

Workshops in technocultural digital skills; Digital Video.
TCS 007C
Technocultural Workshop: Digital Sound

Workshops in technocultural digital skills; Digital Sound.
TCS 007D
Technocultural Workshop: Web Design

Workshops in technocultural digital skills; Web Design.
TCS 007E
Technocultural Workshop: Topics in Digital Production

Workshops in technocultural digital skills; Topics in Digital Production.
TCS 103
Interactivity & Animation

Fundamentals of creating interactive screen-based work. Theories of interactivity, linear versus non-linear structures and audience involvement and participation. Use of digital production tools to produce class projects.
TCS 111
Community Media Production

Use of video and new media tools to address social issues among neighborhood and community groups.  Students will use basic video, sound, and lighting techniques as they work with local groups in a group video project.  
TCS 111
Community Media Production

Use of video and new media tools to address social issues among neighborhood and community groups.  Students will use basic video, sound, and lighting techniques as they work with local groups in a group video project.  
TCS 112
New Radio Features & Documentary

New feature and documentary production for radio and other audiophonic media, including audio streaming websites and installation. Emphasis on new and experimental approaches to audio production for broadcast on community radio and in international arts programming.
TCS 150
Introduction to Theories of the Technoculture

Major cultural theories of technology with emphasis on media, communications, and the arts. Changing relationships between technologies, humans, and culture. Focus on the evolution of modern technologies and their reception within popular and applied contexts.
TCS 152
New Trends in Technocultural Arts

Current work at the intersection of the arts, culture, science, and technology including biological and medical sciences,  computer science and communications, and artificial intelligence and digital media. 
TCS 153
Concepts of Innovative Soundtracks

Innovative and unconventional soundtracks in cinema, media arts, and fine arts.  Introduction to basic analytical skills for understanding sound-image relationships.
TCS 154
Outsider Machines

Invention, adaptation and use of technologies outside the mainstream,  commonsense, and the  possible. Topics include machines as metaphor  and embodied thought, eccentric customizing and  and fictional technologies.  
TCS 155
Introduction to Documentary Studies

Recent evolution of the documentary. The personal essay film; found-footage/appropriation work; non-linear, multi-media forms; spoken word; storytelling; oral history recordings; and other examples of documentary expression.  
TCS 159
Media Subcultures

Relationships between subcultural groups and media technologies. Media as the cohesive and persuasive force of subcultural activities. List-servs, websites, free radio, fan 'zines, and hip-hop culture.
TCS 160
Ghosts of the Machine: How Technology Rewires our Senses

Historical, aesthetic and critical approaches to how information technologies produced ghost effects or a sense of terror in response to new media like the photograph, gramophone, film, typewriter, computer, Turing Machine. Focus on technological media transforms sense perception.
TCS 190
Research Methods in Technocultural Studies

Introduction to basic research methods for Technocultural Studies: electronic and archived images, sounds and data, satellite downlinking, radiowave scanning, and oral histories.
TCS 191
Writing Across Media

Introduction to experimental approaches to writing for different media and artistic practices. How written texts relate to the images, sounds, and performances in digital and media production. 
TTP 220
Transportation Planning & Policy

Transportation planning process at the regional level, including the role of federal policy in shaping regional transportation planning, tools and techniques used in regional transportation planning, issues facing regional transportation planning agencies, pros and cons of potential solutions and strategies.
TTP 281
ITS Transportation Seminar Series

Transportation seminars by guest speakers, on varied topics.
TTP 282
Transportation Orientation Seminar

Ten weeks of seminars, introducing various topics in transportation research and education, focusing on topics of particular interest at UC Davis.
TTP 283
Professionalism, Leadership, & Ethics

Speakers from industry, government, academia, and NGOs will lead discussions about succeeding and performing in the professional world. They will address leadership, ethics, and other workplace issues.  
TXC 006
Introduction to Textiles

Introduction to the structure and properties of textiles. Consumer use and fabric characteristics are emphasized.
TXC 007
Style & Cultural Studies

Multiple and overlapping influences of gender, sexuality, ethnicity, and class on constructions of identity and community are explored through the study of style in popular culture and everyday life. Continuity and change in clothing and appearance styles are interpreted.
TXC 008
The Textiles & Apparel Industries

Textile and apparel industries including fashion theory, production, distribution, and consumption of textile goods.
TXC 099
Special Study for Lower Division Students

Special Study
TXC 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates

Special study for advanced undergraduates. 
TXC 290
Seminar

Critical review of selected topics of current interest in textiles.
TXC 298
Group Study

Group study, 
TXC 299
Research

Research.
UWP 001A
Writers’ Workshop

Writing course focuses on the development of writing and revision strategies, exploring ways to understand a writing task; to develop appropriate content for a writing task; to revise content to reflect competence as a communicator.
UWP 007
Practices in College Reading & Writing

Development of skills required for success in college-level writing across genres and disciplines. Integrates reading, critical thinking, and written communication, using texts from across the curriculum. 
UWP 011
Popular Science & Technology Writing 

Positioning of science and technology in society as reflected and constructed in popular texts. Topics include genre theory, demarcation, rhetorical figures, forms of qualitative and quantitative reasoning, and the epistemic role of popularization in science.
UWP 012
Writing & Visual Rhetoric

Introduction to writing needs, conventions, and genres in design contexts. Emphasis on applying critical reading, analysis, and writing skills to designed products, such as graphics, visual communications, and clothes, and designed spaces, such as exhibitions and interior architecture.
UWP 020
Oral English for International Students

Intensive work in oral English for international students, to increase fluency, accuracy, and use of appropriate discourse strategies in academic settings (e.g., seminar, discussion, laboratory). Training in segmental features of English sounds, intonation, stress, non-verbal cues, and register.
UWP 020
Oral English for International Students

Intensive work in oral English for international students, to increase fluency, accuracy, and use of appropriate discourse strategies in academic settings; e.g., seminar, discussion, laboratory. Training in segmental features of English sounds, intonation, stress, non-verbal cues, and register.
UWP 021
Introduction to Academic Reading & Writing for Multilingual Students

Reading and writing paragraphs and short multi-paragraph texts for academic purposes. Suitable for students whose primary home language was not English.
UWP 024
English Structures & Strategies in Academic Writing

Practice in academic writing designed to prepare undergraduate students from language backgrounds other than English for successful academic work. Development of academic writing, critical thinking, and reading skills. Development of clear, accurate language for presenting an effective argument.
UWP 120
Rhetorical Approaches to Scientific & Technological Issues

Application of rhetorical theories to scientific issues. Topics include: Rhetorical dimensions of scientific knowledge-making; scientific voice; rhetorical figures in science; incommensurability and demarcation; epistemology, definition, and classification; science wars; models of scientific literacy and accommodation, and implications for risk communication.
UWP 253
Writing Program Administration

Theories, models, and procedures of writing programs, primarily in higher education. Developmental, first-year, and advanced writing programs, writing centers, writing-across-the-curriculum programs, writing minors and majors, and graduate programs in rhetoric and composition.
UWP 255
Theory & Research in Response to Student Writing

Intensive focus on the critical topic of response or feedback to student writers. Coverage of philosophy, theory, and empirical research on teacher written feedback, teacher-student writing conferences, peer response, and error correction.
UWP 280
Journal Editing Workshop: Writing on the Edge

Reading and critiquing manuscript submissions. Discussing relevant work in the field of writing studies. Applying principles of professional editing. Developmental editing, copy-editing, and typesetting of accepted manuscripts. Soliciting articles and communicating with contributors. Students encouraged to enroll both quarters.
UWP 390
Theory & Practice of Teaching University-Level Composition

Examination of current theories and practices in teaching of writing. Practical application to undergraduate writing courses. Emphasis on designing assignments and class sequences, and responding to student writing. Examination of impact of cultural, technological and theoretical changes on composition pedagogy.
VEN 002
Introduction to Viticulture

Fundamental principles of biology and culture of the grapevine including taxonomy, morphology, physiology, distribution, domestication, utilization, propagation, production systems, harvesting, and storage and processing of grapes. Successful completion should prepare students for upper division courses in viticulture.
VEN 003
Introduction to Winemaking

Overview of the history of wine, viticulture, fermentation, winery operations, the physiology of wine consumption, wines produced in California and other major wine-producing regions and the sensory evaluation of wine. May be taught abroad.
VEN 099
Special Study for Undergraduates


VMB 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates


VMB 255
Pharmacokinetics & Biopharmaceuticals

In-depth study of pharmacokinetics, including the fundamentals of pharmacokinetics, how to design a pharmacokinetic study and how to use both compartmental and non-compartmental analysis to interpret the data.
VMB 298
Group Study

 
VMB 299
Research


VME 057V
Global Population, Health, & Environment

Students critically examine multi-scale processes involving human, animal, and ecosystem health. Online team and independent work engage local and global topics around population pressures on environments and environmental pressures on populations.
VME 198
Directed Group Study

Directed group study. May be taught abroad.
VME 199
Special Studies for Advanced Undergraduates


VME 299
Research


WAS 187
Gun Violence

Gun violence, viewed from the perspectives of criminology and public health. Topics include personal and societal contributing factors and critical assessment of potential solutions.
WFC 010
Wildlife Ecology & Conservation

Introduction to the ecology and conservation of vertebrates. Complexity and severity of world problems in conserving biological diversity.
WFC 011
Introduction to Conservation Biology

Introduction to conservation biology and background to the biological issues and controversies surrounding loss of species and habitats for students with no background in biological sciences. 
WFC 050
Natural History of California's Wild Vertebrates

Examination of the natural history of California's wild vertebrates (fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals), including their biogeography, systematics, ecology and conservation status. 
WFC 051
Introduction to Conservation Biology

Introduction to conservation biology including both biological and social issues related to the loss of species and habitats. Intended for students with no background in biological sciences. 
WFC 198
Directed Group Study


WFC 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates


WFC 230
Advanced Physiological Ecology of Wildlife

Advanced principles of physiological ecology. Ecological, evolutionary and behavioral perspectives on physiological mechanisms used by animals to adapt to their environment in the context of climate change and other threats to biodiversity. Primary literature will form the basis of discussion.
WFC 298
Group Study


WFC 299
Research


WMS 020
Cultural Representations of Gender

Interdisciplinary investigation of how specific cultures represent gender difference. Examine a variety of cultural forms and phenomena including film, television, literature, music, popular movements, and institutions.
WMS 025
Gender & Global Cinema

Role gender plays in film history/culture in various geographical contexts and in aspects of contemporary globalization. Films from nations such as China, Colombia, Cuba, Ethiopia, India, Iran, Korea, New Zealand, and the U.S.
WMS 050
Introduction to Critical Gender Studies

Introduction to interdisciplinary, critical gender studies. Addresses the emergence of women’s, gender and feminist studies internationally, its links to women’s movements, and its influence within the various arts, humanities and social science disciplines.
WMS 060
Feminist Critiques of Western Thought

Critical introduction to major traditions of social thinking in the West from a feminist perspective. 
WMS 070
Theory & History of Sexualities

Key issues in the social construction, organization, and reproduction of sexualities such as the intersection of sexual identity with gender, race, ethnicity, and class, and the relation between movements for sexual liberation and the regulation of the body.
WMS 080
Special Topics in Critical Gender Studies

In-depth examination of a women and gender studies topic related to the research interest of the instructor. 
WMS 090X
Lower Division Seminar

Examination of a special topic in Womens Studies through shared readings, discussions, and written assignments.
WMS 091
Research Seminar in the Transnational Production & Consumption of Fashion

Preparation for a research conference.
WMS 102
Gender & Post Colonialism

Explores changing configurations of race, gender, sexuality, class and implications for governmentality in one or more colonial or postcolonial regimes in one or more societies.
WMS 130
Globalization & Politics of Family Change

Political/cultural changes, conflicts, and economic disparities that have led to greater mobility and dispersal of families. Transnationalism on gender relations, sexualities, and the meaning of family.
WMS 136
Critical Food Studies

Production and consumption of food at the intersections of gender, race, ethnicity, nation, and body. Individual and familial experiences as part of larger economic and political structures in the U.S. and globally.
WMS 138
Critical Fashion Studies

Feminist cultural studies of style-fashion-dress through transnational circuits, personal subjectivities. Fashion as means of gender oppression and liberation. Histories and discourses of  masculinities and femininities. Clothing works on global assembly line. Use of dress in construction/regulation of identities.
WMS 139
Feminist Cultural Studies

Histories, theories, and practices of feminist traditions within Cultural Studies.
WMS 140
Gender & Law

Exploration of womens legal rights in historical and contemporary context, discussing a variety of legal issues and applicable feminist theories. Topics include constitutional equal protection, discrimination in employment and education, sexual orientation discrimination, and the regulation of abortion.
WMS 148
Science, Gender, & Social Justice

Critical reading and reflection on the history of Western science, scientific institutions and the changing role of science in relation to inequalities of class, race, gender and sexuality, and global struggles for equality and justice. 
WMS 158
Masculinities

Cultural, economic, and political forces which shape historical and contemporary masculinities. Impact of race, class, ability, nation and sexuality on experiences and cultural representations of masculinity. 
WMS 160
Women, "Race" & Sexuality in Postcolonial Cinema 

Feminist analysis of race, sexuality and class in the representation of women in commercial and/or independent films. 
WMS 162
Feminist Film Theory & Criticism

Historical overview of and contemporary issues in feminist film theory, including representation, spectatorship, and cultural production. Film stars, women filmmakers, and the intersections of gender, race, sexuality, and class in films and their audiences.
WMS 164
Topics in Gender & Cinematic Representation

Examination of a specific topic within the broad rubric of gender and cinema. Possible topics include Latinas in Hollywood; gender, nation, cinema; and gender and film genre. Topics vary.
WMS 174
Body Politics

The body as a site where status inequalities are formed and resisted. Self-making through bodywork, history of gendered and racial meanings of the body, and analysis of normalizing discourses and practices.
WMS 175
Gender & Experience of Race

Exploration of the co-construction of “race” and gender in comparative national historical contexts and contemporary lived experience. Study of intersections of race and gender in identities and how institutions, labor migration, social movements and consumption shape racialized gendered identities. 
WMS 178B
Women Writers & the Transnational Imaginary: Asia

Writings by women from diverse regions and cultures, understood in their cultural, socio-economic, and historical contexts, with each course offering a focus on women’s writing in specific geographic/national locations and their diasporas: Asia. 
WMS 178C
Women Writers & the Transnational Imaginary: The Caribbean

Writings by women from diverse regions and cultures, understood in their cultural, socio-economic, and historical contexts, with each course offering a focus on women’s writing in specific geographic/national locations and their diasporas: The Caribbean. 
WMS 178D
Women Writers & the Transnational Imaginary: Africa

Writings by women from diverse regions and cultures, understood in their cultural, socio-economic, and historical contexts, with each course offering a focus on women’s writing in specific geographic/national locations and their diasporas: Africa. 
WMS 178E
Women Writers & the Transnational Imaginary: Diasporic Women Writers in Europe

Writings by women from diverse regions and cultures, understood in their cultural, socio-economic, and historical contexts, with each course offering a focus on women’s writing in specific geographic/national locations and their diasporas: Diasporic Women Writers in Europe. 
WMS 178F
Transnationalism & Writing by Women of Color 

Writings by women of color in a transnational framework, understood in their cultural, socio-economic, and historical contexts. The interrelation among gender, writing, nationalism, and transnationalism with focus on women's writing in specific geographic/national locations and their diasporas: Topics on Women Writers of Color.
WMS 179
Literature as Aesthetics of Resistance 

Literature by women and other marginal groups which embody dissent and subversion as a means of challenging the status quo and to affect social transformation. 
WMS 180
Women of Color Writing in the United States

Literature, especially novels, written by contemporary women of color in the United States, understood in their socio-economic, cultural and historical contexts.
WMS 182
Globalization, Gender & Culture

Critical gender analysis of globalization as a process of interconnected cultural, social and economic transformations inflected by gender, nation, class and race/ethnicity. Critical self-reflection and social observation skills.
WMS 184
Gender in the Arab World

Examination of the history, culture, and social/political/economic dynamics of gender relations and gendering in the Arab world.
WMS 187
Gender & Public Policy

Role of gender in the creation of social policies, especially with respect to issues brought into the policy arena by contemporary feminism.
WMS 189
Special Topics in Critical Gender Studies

In-depth examination of a women's studies topic related to the research interests of the instructor.
WMS 190
Senior Seminar

Capstone course for senior Womens Studies majors, which focuses on current issues on feminism as they impact theory, public policy, and practice.
WMS 191
Capstone Seminar 

Revision, completion, and presentation of senior research or creative project. Creating a multimedia website for publishing research and creative projects.  
WMS 193
Feminist Leadership Seminar

Use feminist methods to critically reflect on the ethical, methodological and strategic aspects of an organization, project, campaign, movement or other social change initiative.
WMS 195
Thematic Seminar in Critical Gender & Women's Studies

Group study of a topic, issue or area in feminist theory and research involving intensive reading and writing.
WMS 200A
Current Issues in Feminist Theory

Current issues in feminist theory; techniques employed to build feminist theory in various fields.
WMS 201
Special Topics in Feminist Theory & Research

Explores in depth a topic in feminist theory and research related to the research interests of the instructor.
WMS 299
Special Study for Graduate Students


FRS 001
First-Year Seminar

Investigation of a special topic through shared readings, discussions, written assignments, term papers, and special activities (such as fieldwork, site visits, laboratory work, etc.). Emphasis placed upon student participation in learning. Students may take more than one First-Year Seminar, but may not take more than one in any given quarter.
FRS 002
First-Year Seminar

Investigation of a special topic through shared readings, discussions, written assignments, term papers, and special activities (such as fieldwork, site visits, laboratory work, etc.). Emphasis placed upon student participation in learning. Students may take more than one First-Year Seminar, but may not take more than one in any given quarter.
FRS 003
First-Year Seminar

Investigation of a special topic through shared readings, discussions, written assignments, term papers, and special activities (such as fieldwork, site visits, laboratory work, etc.). Emphasis placed upon student participation in learning. Students may take more than one First-Year Seminar, but may not take more than one in any given quarter.
FRS 004
First-Year Seminar

Investigation of a special topic through shared readings, discussions, written assignments, term papers, and special activities (such as fieldwork, site visits, laboratory work, etc.). Emphasis placed upon student participation in learning. Students may take more than one First-Year Seminar, but may not take more than one in any given quarter.
