
Sociological and historical analysis of the experience, culture, and relations of and between groups considered racial and/or ethnic minorities in the United States.
Introductory survey of Afro-American Studies methods and techniques; problems and methodology in Afro-American Studies.
Origin and development of African descent communities and cultures in the Caribbean, and Latin America. Similarities and differences among African descent communities and cultures in terms of religious practices, music, and national identity.  
Study of the origin and development of African descent communities and cultures in the U.S.A., Canada, and Mexico.  
Themes and style of new cultural forms in Africa as displayed in art, music, film and writing, especially in regard to blending of indigenous and foreign influences. Social and political forces shaping contemporary cultural expression.
Black female social, intellectual, and psychological development. Black women's contributions in history, literature, and social science; life experiences of Black women and philosophical underpinnings of the feminist movement.
Analysis of social science research to examine relationship between black (African-descent) family structures, patterns of functioning, and political, economic, and social conditions in the U.S.
Introduction to the psychological issues faced by African Americans. Description of any disparities in mental health care experienced by African American and Diaspora populations in the United States.  Analysis of issues from European/Western and Afrocentric frame of reference. Emphasis on Optimal Theory, a psychological theory based on an Afrocentric world view.
Exploration and analysis of Black social and political thought in the Americas.
Exposition and critical analysis of selected theoretical writings of Black intellectuals, and especially political and social thinkers, in the Americas.
Afro-American visual arts tradition, folk and formal, in historical and cultural context, from 1600 through Reconstruction.
Afro-American visual arts tradition, folk and formal, in historical and cultural context, from Reconstruction to the present.
Recurrence of cultural tropes in the works of major black world authors and formation of an African-oriented canon. Principal activities include critical reading and discovery of literature as a cultural resource.
Colonial and post-colonial sub-Saharan African literature and the African oral traditions from which it emerged. Genres and themes of African literature from the 19th century to the present.
Relationship between language and identity in literature from Africa and the African Diaspora. Use of pidgins, Creoles, translation from African languages and impact of language policies.
Political and social developments in 20th-century South Africa as illustrated by a range of South African writing. Response of different writers to race relations, impact of government policy on types and context of writing.
Theory and history of African American folklore and folklife, includingmusic, material culture, oral narrative, proverbs, and humor. African and Caribbean cultural influences on New World folk genres will be probed.
Comparative and historical survey of Islam in the regional and cultural settings of Sub-Saharan Africa and the Americas.
Comparative study of African religious heritage in the Americas: Jamaica, Trinidad, Cuba, U.S.A., Haiti, and Brazil. Emphasis on the origins and development of Candomble, Santeria, Shango, Vodun, andRastafarianism in the New World.
Examination of the historical role of Christian belief and practice as well as the institution of the Black Church in the experience of African Americans, from slavery to the present.
Study of Black documentary history and understanding of the use of the documentary form for political purposes. Discussion of documentary theory. Each student, singly or in a team, will create and carefully edit a documentary project.
History of the representation of African Americans in television; how the representations reflect social and political forces in American society.  Role of African Americans in actively shaping their representation.
Comparative approach in the study of fictional film and video dealing with the African American experience drawing on film and cultural studies to examine and discuss selected works.
Comparative approach in the study of dramatic films and videos that treat black life in Africa and Europe. Critical attention focused on the imaginative construction of ethnicity, race, nationality, gender, and sexuality in each particular work.
Black documentary history and documentary theory. Use of black documentary for political purposes.  
Creation of documentary projects, with students working in production crews. 
Examination of the ways in which the processes of the extraction, purification and use of natural resources and the complex regimes of valuation and commodification they (re)produce lead to cooperation and conflict in contemporary Africa and beyond.
Exploration of modernity and globalization and their dimensions and impacts in/on Africa. Examination of modern necessities and constrains in Africa in relation to (neo)colonialism, transnational encounters, technology,  gender, risk, ritual, identity, culture, etc.
History, aesthetics, urban context, and economics of hip-hop in the US, and its globalization. Hip-hop's four artistic elements-rap, deejaying, breakdance, and aerosol art-allow the examination of issues of race, ethnicity, and gender in youth culture and American society.  
Investigation of hip-hop youth cultures outside the United States using globalization and Cultural Studies theories. Analysis of international hip-hop sites in Africa, Asia, Europe, South America, and the Middle East through reading, discussion, and visiting virtual sites.
Intensive study of special topics in African American film.  
Intensive treatment of a special topic or problem in African or African Diaspora Studies.
Supervised internship in community, government, or private institutions, in all subject areas offered by the African American & African Studies Program.
Leading of small voluntary discussion groups affiliated with one of the department's regular courses.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.

Introduction to history of African American Studies. Topics include: research agendas, policy implications, debates, crises, and institutional frameworks.
Introduction to the history and current organization of African Studies as area of intellectual investigation. Offers an opportunity to review research agenda and policy implications, debates, crises, and institutional frameworks surrounding the production of knowledge about Africa.
Group study.
Natural history, management, historical and current uses, and specialized disciplinary features of model and novel animal systems used in research. Development of conceptual approaches in organismal biology to improve experimental design and interpretation of interdisciplinary research studies.
Natural history, management, historical and current uses, and specialized disciplinary features of model and novel animal systems used in research. Development of conceptual approaches in organismal biology to improve experimental design and interpretation of interdisciplinary research studies. 
Topics include: structure of grants, attention to specifications, concise persuasive writing, and grant budgeting. Identify grant opportunities, write a persuasive research grant proposal, and administer grants.
History of nutritional energetics. Evaluation of energy transformations associated with food utilization. Energy expenditures at cellular, tissue, and animal levels as affected by diet and physiological state. Current and future feeding systems.
Introduction to advanced techniques used for assisted reproductive technologies in mammals and birds, genetic engineering, gene editing, stem cell biology. Offered in alternate years. 
Model development and evaluation including sensitivity analyses using R. Four principle modeling methodologies included: algebraic functions of biological processes, physiological-based compartmental models, linear programming and meta-analysis. Fundamental background and understanding of mathematical modeling principles in biological systems.
Definition of Stress; Physiological mechanisms of adaptation to stress; Hormonal control of the systemic stress response; Mechanisms of the cellular stress response; Discussion of current trends in stress physiology and current methods for studying the stress response.
Seminar on advanced topics in animal biology. Presentations by members of the Animal Biology Graduate Group and guest speakers.
Student presentations of research in Animal Biology and discussions among participating students and Animal Biology faculty.  

Research with a faculty member in Animal Biology Graduate Group.
Practical experience in the methods and problems of teaching animal biology. Includes analysis of laboratory exercises, discussion of teaching techniques, grading scientific essays, preparing for and conducting discussion or laboratory sections, formulating quiz and exam questions under instructor supervision. 

Basic biological disciplines important to an understanding of practical animal biology issues including the evolution of animal groups, geneticmechanisms, animal physiology as it relates to maintenance and production, and aspects of comparative anatomy, behavior and ecology.
Animal management and conservation. Societal concerns arising frommanagement and conservation issues, including economics, aesthetics, regulations, safety, public perspectives and advocacy
Office, laboratory or fieldwork off or on campus in research, governmental regulation, policy making, and private enterprise dealing with animal related issues of production, welfare, pest management, biodiversity and the environment. All requirements of Internship Approval Request form must be met.
Water and biological buffers; thermodynamics of metabolism; structure and function of biomolecules; enzyme kinetics and function; membrane biology; digestion and absorption; carbohydrate metabolism.   
Physiological function and metabolism of lipids and amino acids; integrative metabolism; biochemical basis for nutrient requirements; structure and function of vitamins; mineral metabolism and requirements.
Practicum may be an experimental research project, a library research project or some other creative activity that will serve as a capstone experience for the Animal Biology major.
Helps prevent or solve problems during the students' senior practicum activity.
Office, laboratory or fieldwork off or on campus in research, governmental regulations, policy making, and private enterprise dealing with animal related issues of production, welfare, pest management, biodiversity and the environment. All requirements of Intership Approval Request form must be met.
Intermediate welding to include hardfacing and inert gas welding. Class projects on repair and fabrication by welding. Troubleshooting and major repair of field equipment.


Principles of 2-stroke cycle, 4-stroke cycle gasoline and 4-stroke cycle diesel engine construction and operation. Engine systems, performance, troubleshooting, and overhaul.
Use of temperature sensors; measurement of thermal conductivity and heat transfer in foods; refrigeration, freezing, concentration and dehydration of foods.
Optimal structures and environments for animal growth and comfort; heat and moisture transfer principles; heating, cooling, ventilating principles and equipment; animal housing design; environmental regulations and waste management practices.
Basic principles of water chemistry and water treatment processes as they relate to aquacultural systems.
Design of aquacultural systems: design methodology, principles of fluid mechanics, site selection and facility planning, management operations, computer modeling.
Basic design, installation, and operation principles of irrigation systems for turf and landscape: golf courses, parks, highways, public buildings, etc. Emphasis on hardware association with sprinkler and drip/trickle systems.
Data representation and analysis in geographic information systems (GIS). Creation of spatial data sets from analog and digital sources such as aerial photography and maps; data structures, data management, database design, georeferencing, georectification, surface models, analysis, and spatial data visualization.
Ecosystem and landscape modeling with emphasis on hydrology and solute transport. Spatial analysis of environmental risk analysis including ecological risk assessment, natural resource management. Spatial database structures, scripting, data models, and error analysis in GIS.
Research conferences for specialized study in applied biological systems technology.
Supervised internship in applied biological systems technology.
Tutoring individual students, leading small voluntary discussion groups, or assisting the instructor in laboratories affiliated with one of the department's regular courses.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.

Zero Net Energy concepts and social, technical, economic, and environmental considerations. Multidisciplinary research and analysis for clients.
Practical and theoretical considerations of pest control systems and techniques.  Design, selection, and use of mechanical systems for field, orchard, greenhouse, and vector control use.  Biological, legal, and environmental considerations in pest control and pesticide application.
Special topic.
Special topic.
Special topic.
Research problems, progress, and techniques in applied biological systems technology.


Preparation of the teacher to plan, organize, and conduct an agricultural mechanics program in secondary schools. Development of and presentation of lesson plans and teaching aids. Review of subject matter in metal fabrication, power and machinery and agricultural structures areas.
Focuses on the preparation of complex financial statements. Topics include accounting recognition, measurement, and disclosure, as well as the theoretical foundations of and motivations for financial reporting choices.
Advanced treatment of recognition, measurement, and disclosure including pensions, accounting for income taxes, mergers and acquisitions, consolidations, special-purpose entities, and foreign subsidiaries. Includes accounting for governmental and nonprofit entities, as well as advanced treatment of international accounting standards.
Detailed analysis of federal taxation of individuals. Topics include the timing of income recognition, deductions and credits for tax purposes, as well as the basics of property transactions.
Advanced treatment of complex tax transactions and entities. Topics include aspects of federal taxation of entities and the applicable impact upon individual taxpayers. Coverage includes basis analysis as applicable to pass through entities and an introduction to professional responsibilities.
In-depth analysis of individual income tax issues and property transactions including non-taxable exchanges, compensation, gifts, and transfer taxes. Expanded analysis of multistate tax issues. Emphasis is on the interrelationships of complex individual transactions as well as planning techniques. 
Analysis of detailed business entity tax issues including basis calculations, alternative minimum taxation, multistate and multinational taxation, stock transactions, and mergers and acquisitions. Tax planning for entities and relationships between business entities and their owners.
Evaluation of complex financial accounting reports by managers and persons outside the firm, such as investors, creditors, and financial analysts. Topics include cash flow vs. income measurement, ratio and valuation analysis, and the effects of international accounting standards.
Introduction to the audit environment, professional standards, the accounting profession, and the professional responsibilities of accountants. Integrate audit topics across the areas of financial, cost, tax and systems accounting. 
Advanced treatment of the audit process and environment. Topics include audit planning and performance, evidence, internal controls, professional standards, and audit reports. Reviews, compilations and attestation services are examined, as are governmental agency audits.
Analysis of management accounting systems including cost accounting, performance measurement, and compensation and reward systems. Focuses on the production of information useful for managerial decision-making, as well as the design of these systems. 
Analysis of information systems used for accounting, recordkeeping, and control. Topics include the regulatory requirements of accounting control systems as well as their implementation and auditing considerations.
Overview of written and oral professional communications with an emphasis on structuring and documenting audits and reports, understanding audiences (investors, creditors, regulators, and other stakeholders), and consideration of ethical and regulatory responsibilities.
Analysis of accountants' professional responsibilities and ethics. Topics include the behavioral foundations of ethics in a business environment, how those elements affect accountants' integrity, objectivity, and independence. Professional standards related to accountants' conduct are also covered.
Analytical techniques and methods as related to the practice of financial statement auditing. Combines theory and the application of auditing professional standards including diagnosing problems and issues, analyzing relevant information, and reporting decision results and recommendations.
Supervised internship off and on campus in areas of agricultural education.
Directed group study. 
AED support moved to ANS, informed July 2018 by Lisa Holmes. Subject moved in ICMS, took some time. 
Philosophy and nature of formal and non-formal agricultural and environmental education programs. Emphasis on understanding the role of the teacher and observing a variety of programs.
Theory and principles of audiovisual communications. Comparison of audiovisual materials such as transparencies, slides, computer- generated graphics, and videos. Operation and use of audiovisual equipment is stressed.
Design and production of educational, technical, and professional multimedia presentations. Instructional or professional presentations using a variety of media, including slides, video, transparencies, and computer-generated graphics.
Supervised internship off and on campus in areas of agricultural education.
Experience as teaching assistant in agriculture or home economics programs in public schools.
Major paradigms in program planning and development. Emphasis on key steps in curriculum development, including selection and organization of educational objectives, learning experiences and teaching materials andresources.
Development of teaching strategies with special emphasis on the designing of learning experiences, instructional execution, and use of teaching aids in agricultural education.
Develop an understanding of the Future Farmers of America and supervised occupational experience programs through planning, conducting, and evaluating actual programs.
Directed teaching including supervision of occupational experience programs and youth activities in secondary schools or community colleges.
Selection and implementation of community resources in teaching.
Discussion and evaluation of current issues, theories and research in agricultural education.
The chemistry and biochemistry of foods, nutritional chemicals, pesticides, and other special topics as they apply to agricultural and environmental chemistry.


Methods of art historical research and analysis, and general issues in critical thought. Writing skills appropriate to a range of art-historical exposition.  
Study of forms and symbols in historic and contemporary masterpieces.
A historical survey of the development of the language of symbolism and iconography in Hinduism.
Introduction to the urban history of the Islamic world. Critical study of the historiography of the Islamic city, development of urban form, institutions and rituals, and analysis of selected themes.
Critical study of the arts of the luxury book in the pre-modern Islamic world. Representation in Islam, the relationship of word and image, the discipline of calligraphy, aesthetics and representation in Persianate painting.
Emergence of modernism in Europe from the late l8th century to the middle of the l9th century. Major artistic events viewed against a revolutionary backdrop of changing attitudes toward identity, race, and gender.
Innovations of Impressionists, Post-Impressionists, and Symbolists in relation to social changes. Assessment of role of dealers and critics, myth of the artist-genius, and gender relations in French art and culture of the late 1800s.
Major movements in architecture of the 20th century in Europe and America. Formal innovations are examined within the social, political, and economic circumstances in which they emerged.
Study of a broad problem or theoretical issue in art, architecture, or material culture. Intensive reading, discussion, research, writing. 
Study of a broad problem or theoretical issue in art, architecture, or material culture. Intensive reading, discussion, research, writing. 
Study of a broad problem or theoretical issue in art, architecture, or material culture. Intensive reading, discussion, research, writing.
Study of a broad problem or theoretical issue in art, architecture, or material culture. Intensive reading, discussion, research, writing.
Study of a broad problem or theoretical issue in art, architecture, or material culture. Intensive reading, discussion, research, writing. 
Study of a broad problem or theoretical issue in art, architecture, or material culture. Intensive reading, discussion, research, writing.
Study of a broad problem or theoretical issue in art, architecture, or material culture. Intensive reading, discussion, research, writing. 
Study of a broad problem or theoretical issue in art, architecture, or material culture. Intensive reading, discussion, research, writing.
Study of a broad problem or theoretical issue in art, architecture, or material culture. Intensive reading, discussion, research, writing.
Study of a broad problem or theoretical issue in art, architecture, or material culture. Intensive reading, discussion, research, writing.
Study of a broad problem or theoretical issue in art, architecture, or material culture. Intensive reading, discussion, research, writing. 
Study of a broad problem or theoretical issue in art, architecture, or material culture. Intensive reading, discussion, research, writing.
Supervised program of internships at professional art institutions such as museums, galleries, and art archives including collections of slides and photographs.
Open only to students in the Art History Honors Program. Independent study of an art historical problem culminating in the writing of an honors thesis under the supervision of a faculty guidance committee.
Open only to students in the Art History Honors Program. Independent study of an art historical problem culminating in the writing of an honors thesis under the supervision of a faculty guidance committee.
Research and initial drafting of a senior thesis paper in a scholarly area of Art History, under supervision of Art History faculty advisor. 
Final writing of a senior thesis paper in a scholarly area of Art History, under supervision of Art History faculty advisor. 
Meeting concurrently with AHI 200B, the colloquium provides a structured, supportive environment for second-year Art History graduate students drafting masters' theses. Offers a forum for technical discussions, discussion of writing/editing procedures, and peer review of writing in progress.
Issues accompanying the evolution and function of museums from cabinets of curiosities in 16th-century Europe to modern art centers. Examination of divergent motives behind collecting, exhibiting, and interpretation of objects. Investigation of museums' historical legacies and continuing philosophical dilemmas. 
Supervised internship at professional art or cultural institution including museum, galleries, archives, government offices, visual resources libraries, etc. 

Investigation of a special topic in American Studies through shared readings, discussions, written assignments, and special activities (such as fieldwork, site visits). Emphasis on student participation in learning.

Exploration of the small group cultures of American corporate workplaces, including the role of environment, stories, jokes, rituals, ceremonies, personal style, and play. The effects of cultural diversity upon corporate cultures, both from within and in contact with foreign corporations.
In consultation with advisor, student writes an extended research paper on a topic proposed in AMS 190A.
Supervised internship and study within and about key organizations in American civilization at archives, museums, schools, historical societies, governmental and social agencies, etc., with attention to the techniques of participant obersvation and the collection of ethnographical data.
Supervised internship and study in social & community organizations, schools, cultural institutions (e.g., libraries, museums, and archives), or other work sites. Final written report and other assignments as per contract with supervisor.
Tutoring in lower division American Studies courses, usually in small discussion groups. Periodic meetings with the instructor in charge; reports and readings.


Theory and methods for the study of the folklore and the folk customary behavior of Americans; contributions of folklore studies to scholarship in humanities and social science disciplines.
Interdisciplinary approaches to understanding the social and cultural construction of masculinities; attention to the effects of biology, gender, race, class, sexual and national identities; criticism of oral, printed, visual, and mass mediated texts, and of sicial relations and structure.
Interdisciplinary theories and methods for the study of food in American culture; food studies in relation to issues of identity (age, gender, ethnicity, religion, region, etc.), social relations, systems of production, and cultures of consumption.

Philosophical issues, goals, strategies and tools in field and laboratory research. 
Classic, seminal papers in animal behavior. Discussion of readings and broader historical context in which papers were written.
Survey of the phenomena and theory of animal behavior from the perspectives of multiple biological disciplines, including evolution, ecology, psychology, genetics, neurobiology, endocrinology, and animal science.
Survey of the phenomena and theory of animal behavior from the perspectives of multiple biological disciplines, including evolution, ecology, psychology, genetics, neurobiology, endocrinology, and animal science.
Interface between animal behavior, ecology and evolution. New developments in behavioral ecology development and testing of hypotheses in this discipline.
Analysis of literature in behavior and an allied discipline or disciplines that offer the potential, in combination, to advance the understanding of a topic in animal behavior conceptually and empirically. Topics vary from year to year.
Development of an empirical or theoretical interdisciplinary approach to research on a current topic in animal behavior.
Critical presentation and evaluation of current literature and ongoing research in behavioral ecology.
Reading, reports and discussion on current topics in animal behavior, with a focus on topics that lie at the interface between animal behavior, ecology and evolution.
Selected topics in animal behavior.
Presentation and analysis of research papers on social and foraging behavior of predatory animals, antipredator strategies of prey species, co-evolution of predators and prey, and ecology of predator prey interactions.
Lectures and/or discussion of current issues, problems, or techniques in animal behavior.
Supervised work experience in anesthesia and related fields.
Introduction to anesthesiology during the MS3 year, with emphasis on introduction to the field of anesthesiology and the day-to-day practice of an anesthesiologist in the perioperative setting.
Away clinical rotation in Anesthesiology or Pain Medicine.
In-depth exposure to anesthesia through informal lectures and mentoring by anesthesiologists. Emphasis on understanding and applying anesthetic principles in managing administration of general, regional, and specialized areas.
Two week rotation provides a broad exposure to various patient care services within the Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine to apply medical knowledge to safely care for patients.
Perioperative Management of Obstetric Patient advanced clinical clerkship will offer the medical student the chance to understand and be able to apply the principles of basic science into major improvements in obstetric anesthesia patient care.
Senior clerkship to expose students to all facets of treating pain in all aspects of clinical care: outpatient and inpatient settings, acute and chronic pain, end of life issues, pediatrics, rehabilitation, etc. Daily clinics, rounds, and lectures.
Participate in the perioperative care of patients undergoing neurosurgical procedures while under the supervision of anesthesia, neurology and neurosurgical ICU residents and attending physicians.
Work at the level of a sub intern in Inpatient and/or Outpatient settings. Expectation is to provide direct patient management.
Daily experience in clinical anesthesiology at the preoperative screening unit, operating room, post anesthesia care unit, chronic pain management clinic with daily clinical correlation case discussions, and one-on-one interaction with faculty anesthesiologists.
Review and demonstrate the application of basic physiology and pharmacology to patient care. There will be an in-depth analysis of the physiology and pharmacology of the cardiovascular, pulmonary, nervous, renal and endocrine systems. 
Integrate applied and practical neuroanatomy, physiology, pharmacology, psychology/psychiatry and social medicine in the care of patients who are receiving care for pain caused by acute or chronic medical disease or trauma.  
Directed reading and discussion and/or laboratory investigation on selected topics.
Problems in clinical and/or laboratory research.
Principles and techniques of cytogenetics applied to animal systems; chromosome harvest techniques, analysis of mitosis and meiosis, karyotyping, chromosome banding, cytogenetic mapping, chromosome structure and function, comparative cytogenetics.
Coat color, parentage testing, medical genetics, pedigrees, breeds, the gene map and genus Equus. Emphasis on understanding horse genetics based on the unity of mammalian genetics and making breeding decisions based on fundamental genetic concepts.
Coat color, parentage testing, medical genetics, pedigrees, breeds, the gene map and genus Equus. Emphasis on understanding horse genetics based on the unity of mammalian genetics and making breeding decisions based on fundamental genetic concepts.
Principles of quantitative genetics applied to improvement of livestock and poultry. Effects of mating systems and selection methods are emphasized with illustration from current breeding practices.
Principles of quantitative genetics applied to improvement of livestock and poultry. Effects of mating systems and selection methods are emphasized with illustration from current breeding practices.
Introduction to the concepts and techniques used in molecular biology; the role of this technology in both basic and applied animal research, and participation in laboratories using some of the most common techniques in molecular biology.
Introduction to the concepts and techniques used in molecular biology; the role of this technology in both basic and applied animal research, and participation in laboratories using some of the most common techniques in molecular biology.
Explore peer-reviewed literature surrounding the latest advances in captive breeding and reintroduction biology.
Selected topics relating to animal genetics.

Theoretical basis of quantitative genetics and the consequences of Mendelian inheritance. Concepts used to estimate quantitative genetic differences and basis for partitioning the phenotypic variance.
Procedures for the genetic evaluation of individuals to include selection indices and mixed model evaluation for single and multiple traits. Methods of estimating genetic trends.
General methods for the estimation of components of variance and covariance and their application to the estimation of heritability, repeatability and genetic correlations are considered. Specific emphasis is given to procedures applicable to livestock populations under selection.
Use of computer algorithms and on-line databases to analyze nucleic acid and protein sequences in molecular genetics research.
Lectures and discussions of advanced topics in animal genetics.
Growth, reproduction, lactation, inheritance, nutrition, and disease control in domesticated animals and species used in aquaculture; the application of sciences to animal production.
Evaluation of type as presently applied to light horses, meat animals and dairy cattle. Relationship between form and function, form and carcass quality, and form and milk production.
Attendance at 3 one-day weekend field trips required. Domestic livestock species with emphasis on visual appraisal, carcass evaluation, and application of performance information. Emphasis on accurate written and oral descriptions of evaluations. Prerequisite to intercollegiate judging competition.
Attendance at three one-day weekend field trips required. Continuation of ANS 022A with emphasis on specific species: swine, beef cattle and sheep. Application of animal science principles to selection and management problem-solving scenarios. Prerequisite to intercollegiate judging competition.
Animal production principles and practices, including five field trips to dairy cattle, beef cattle, sheep, and swine operations and campus labs.
Weekly conference on research problems, progress and techniques in the animal sciences.
Internship off and on campus in dairy, livestock, and aquaculture production, research and management; or in a business, industry, or agency associated with these or other animal enterprises. All requirements of Internship Approval form must be met.


Basic principles of animal physiology in domesticated and captive animals with a comparative approach. Molecular, biochemical, chemical and physical aspects and their influences on function of physiological systems in animals.
Application of principles of animal behavior and physiology to assessment and improvement of the welfare of wild, captive, and domestic animals. Topics include animal pain, stress, cognition, motivation, emotions, and preferences, as well as environmental enrichment methods.
Basic principles of animal behavior as applied to domesticated species.   Emphasis placed on application of the principles of animal behavior.
Basic principles of animal behavior as applied to domesticated species. Emphasis placed on application of the principles of animal behavior.
Research experience with the behavior of large domestic animals. Experimental design, methods of data collection and analysis, and reporting of experimental results.
Research experience with the behavior of large domestic animals. Experimental design, methods of data collection & analysis, and reporting of experimental results.
Introduction to the modern zoo, including history, staffing structure, aspects of animal care such as housing, social management, and enrichment, research in genetics, health, nutrition, behavior, cognition, and guest perceptions. Requires a visit to the Sacramento Zoo and development of a project research proposal based on a specific exhibit at the zoo.
Current applications of sustainable animal agriculture including the challenges of animal production, animal needs, animal well-being, and protection of the environment and resources for future food supply systems. Various scenarios for meeting sustainability objectives are evaluated using computing modeling.
Feeding, breeding, and management of horses; application of the basic principles of animal science to problems of production of all types of horses. Designed for students who wish to become professionally involved in the horse industry.
Current practices in fish production; relationship between the biological aspects of a species and the production systems, husbandry, management, and marketing practices utilized. Emphasis on species currently reared in California.
Management, breeding and feeding of aquatic invertebrates; application of basic principles of physiology, reproduction, and nutrition to production of mollusks and crustaceans for human food; emphasis on interaction of species biology and managerial techniques on production efficiencies.
Anatomical, physiological, developmental, and biochemical aspects of muscle underlying the conversion of muscle to meat. Includes meat processing, preservation, microbiology, and public health issues associated with meat products.
Laboratory exercises and student participation in transformation of live animal to carcass and meat, structural and biochemical changes related to meat quality, chemical and sensory evaluation of meat, and field trips to packing plant and processing plant.
Growth and development of animals from conception to maturity, viewed from practical and biological perspectives; includes genetic, metabolic, nutritional control of cell and organism function.
Consideration of the biochemical, genetic, physiological, nutritional, and structural factors relating to mammary gland development, the initiation of lactation, the composition of milk and lactational performance.
Basic and applied physiology of the exercising horse. Includes physiological systems, gait analysis, lameness, pharmacology, sports medicine; sport horse performance evaluation and conditioning. 
Equine digestion, digestive physiology, diet development and evaluation, and the relationship of the topics to recommended feeding practices and nutritional portfolios.
Reproductive physiology, anatomy and endocrinology of the mare and stallion. Emphasis on structure/function relationships as they are applied to improving equine reproductive management and efficiency.
Applications of linear programming in agriculture, emphasizing resource allocation problems and decision making. Problems include crop production, ration formulation, and farm management. Hands-on experience in developing linear programs and interpreting the results.
Management principles of environmental stewardship for grazing lands, animal feeding, operations and aquaculture operations; existing regulations, sample analyses, interpretation and utilization of data, evaluation of alternative practices, and policy development.
Experimental approaches used in animal endocrinology research. Introductions to a variety of topics to help assimilate many ideas from physiology courses, experimental approaches, and skills reading and interpreting scientific papers.
Physiological and developmental functions related to reproduction, breeding efficiency and fertility of animals commonly used in aquaculture.
Design, conduct, analyze, and present a research project involving cell culture.
Animal nutrition research experience for senior-level students. Forming a valid hypothesis, designing treatments, preparing for experiments, recording measurements in the field, summarizing results. Emphasis on developing essential research skills & proper techniques for collecting, summarizing, and presenting data.
Biochemical methods for developing and conducting research with production animals, and interpreting and presenting data. Laboratory focus course which uses sheep as model. There may be one or two mandatory all day Saturday field trips. 
Biochemical methods for developing and conducting research with production animals, and interpreting and presenting data. Laboratory focus course which uses sheep as model. There may be one or two mandatory all day Saturday field trips. 
Daily care and maintenance of fish in residential aquariums, research and commercial facilities. Biological and environmental factors important to sound management of fish. Laboratories focus on fish culture including growth trials and biochemical assays.
Daily care and maintenance of fish in residential aquariums, research and commercial facilities. Biological and environmental factors important to sound management of fish. Laboratories focus on fish culture including growth trials and biochemical assays.
Daily care and maintenance of birds for research, commercial production and companion or hobby uses. Biological and environmental factors important to sound management of birds. Laboratories focus on bird husbandry, management and care and include growth trials and biochemical assays.
Daily care and maintenance of birds for research, commercial production and companion or hobby uses. Biological and environmental factors important to sound management of birds. Laboratories focus on bird husbandry, management and care and include growth trials and biochemical assays.
Combination of theory and hands-on experiences in animal physiology using various experimental techniques. Practical laboratory skill development from cellular level to whole animal, in areas such as genetics, endocrinology, histology and physiological function.
Combination of theory and hands-on experiences in animal physiology using various experimental techniques. Practical laboratory skill development from cellular level to whole animal, in areas such as genetics, endocrinology, histology and physiological function.
Laboratory animal management procedures in view of animal physiology, health and welfare, government regulations, and experimental needs. Clinical techniques using rodents and rabbits as models.
Examination of the concepts and principles involved in the operation of an equine enterprise. Essential aspects of equine enterprise management, including equine law, marketing, cash flow analysis, and impact of state and federal regulations.
Management and production of companion animals. Integration of the disciplinary principles of behavior, genetics, nutrition, and physiology as related to the care of companion animals.
Management and production of companion animals. Integration of the disciplinary principles of behavior, genetics, nutrition, and physiology as related to the care of companion animals.
Care and management of swine, broilers and turkeys as related to environmental physiology, nutrition and metabolism, disease management and reproduction. Saturday field trips. 
Genetics, physiology, nutrition, economics and business in beef cattle and sheep production. Resources used, species differences, range and feedlot operations. Emphasis on integration and information needed in methods for management of livestock enterprises. One or two Saturday field trips. 
Distribution, processing and marketing of meat and meat products. Meat and meat animal grading and pricing. Government regulations and social/consumer concerns. Future trends and impact on production management practices. Includes poultry.
Scientific principles from genetics, nutrition, physiology, and related fields applied to conversion of animal feed to human food through dairy animals. Management and economic decisions are related to animal biology considering the environment and animal well-being. Mandatory Saturday field-trip. 
Examination of distribution systems, processing practices, product quality, impact of government policy (domestic and foreign), marketing alternatives, and product development.
Examination and application of decision making and problem solving in the production enterprise. Areas of production analysis, problem solving, risk analysis and cost-benefit analysis will be examined in terms of the total enterprise.
In-depth examination of the structure-function relationship of the equine hoof and how it relates to conformation, injury and performance.
Art and science of horseshoeing in equine related fields. Proper use of the tools, materials and techniques in the fabrication of shoes and safe preparation of the hoof for application of shoes.
Basic concepts of animal immunology, microbiology, parasitology, epidemiology, vaccination, and how the knowledge can be used to improve animal health and prevent animal infection & disease. Includes relevant health and disease issues.
Evaluation of the impact of chronic stress on male reproductive development. Isolation stress tests on young animals. Data collection of treatment and control groups. Biological laboratory techniques and analysis. Two-quarter course.
Evaluation of the impact of chronic stress on male reproductive development. Isolation stress tests on young animals. Data collection of treatment and control groups. Biological laboratory techniques and analysis. Two-quarter course.
Evaluation of the impact of chronic stress on male reproductive development. Isolation stress tests on young animals. Data collection of treatment and control groups. Biological laboratory techniques and analysis. Two-quarter course.
Ethical issues relating to animal use in contemporary society. Integration of philosophical theories with scientific evidence relating to animal behavior, mentality, and welfare. Uses of animals in agriculture, research, and as companions. Ethical responsibilities regarding wildlife and the environment.
Ethical issues relating to animal use in contemporary society. Integration of philosophical theories with scientific evidence relating to animal behavior, mentality, and welfare. Uses of animals in agriculture, research, and as companions. Ethical responsibilities regarding wildlife and the environment.
Weekly conference on research problems, progress and techniques in the animal sciences.
Internship off and on campus in dairy, livestock and aquaculture production, research and management; or in a business, industry, or agency associated with these or other animal enterprises. All requirements of Internship Approval Form must be met.
Research with a faculty mentor. Weekly discussion and laboratory on specific research topic. May include a seminar to research group. Choose from sections: (1) Animal Behavior; (2) Animal Genetics; (3) Animal Nutrition; (4) Animal Physiology. 
Carry out a research project (chosen from faculty-suggested or approved proposals) during the academic year under the guidance of a faculty member. Upon completion, write a thesis and present a public seminar describing his/her research.
Carry out a research project (chosen from faculty-suggested or approved proposals) during the academic year under the guidance of a faculty member. Upon completion, write a thesis and present a public seminar describing his/her research.
Carry out a research project (chosen from faculty-suggested or approved proposals) during the academic year under the guidance of a faculty member. Upon completion, write a thesis and present a public seminar describing his/her research.
Tutoring of students in lower division Animal Science courses; weekly conference with instructors in charge of courses; written critiques of teaching procedures.
Selected topics relating to the animal sciences. May be taught abroad.

Examines the forces and issues in animal agriculture through the strategic management process.
Basic model building principles and techniques for statistical and systems simulation models. Optimization techniques for non-linear experimental designs and management models are presented. Quantitative analysis and evaluation of linear and non-linear equations used in agriculture and nutrition.
Critical presentation and analysis of recent journal articles in animal science.  
Weekly conference on research problems, progress and techniques in the animal sciences.
Current research in animal science explored at weekly seminars presented by guest lecturers. Discussion of research presented.
Lectures and discussions of advanced topics in the animal sciences.(Sect. 1, 2, 3-letter grading; from Sect. 4 on-S/U grading only.)
Primarily for majors. Integration of related disciplines in the study of biological anthropology through discussion and research projects. Principal emphasis in human adaptation to the environment.
Introduction to core concepts in anthropological and social theory using Star Trek as a teaching vehicle. Emphasis on thinking anthropologically about everyday life and popular culture. 
Introduction to core concepts in anthropological and social theory using Star Trek as a teaching vehicle. Emphasis on thinking anthropologically about everyday life and popular culture. 

Discussion of the theoretical and philosophical developments in cultural anthropology from the 19th century to the present.
Interdisciplinary study of diversity and change in human societies, using frameworks from anthropology, evolutionary ecology, history, archaeology, psychology, and other fields. Topics include population dynamics, subsistence transitions, family organization, disease, economics, warfare, politics, and resource conservation.
Integration of the interests of resident and indigenous peoples with the conservation of natural resources and ecosystems, using case study examples from both the developing and developed world.
Political economy of environmental struggles. Relationship between social inequality (based on race, class and/or gender) and ecological degradation. Articulation of local peoples, national policy, and the international global economy in the contestation over the use of environmental resources.
Cultural dimensions of law and political power.  Colonial and postcolonial legal regimes, bureaucratic reason, legalized violence, sovereign power, and human rights.
Anthropological approaches to scientific visualization techniques, informatics, simulations. Examination of different visualization techniques toward understanding the work involved in producing them, critical assessment of their power and limits, especially when visualizations are used socially to make claims.
Culture, cognition, meaning, and interpretation; language and the classification of experience; communication and learning in crosscultural perspective.
Introduction to critical medical anthropology. Topics include anthropological analysis of bio-medicine, psychiatry, systems of knowledge and healing, the body, emotions, and clinical encounters in a cross-cultural perspective. 
Survey of anthropological approaches to the study of political organizations; inter-relationships among political institutions, economic infrastructures and cultural complexity.
Analysis of popular protest in Third World and indigenous societies ranging from covert resistance to national revolts. Comparative case studies and theories of peasant rebellions, millenarian movements, social bandits, Indian "wars", ethnic and regional conflicts, gender and class conflicts.
Discussion of anthropological theories of religion with emphasis on non-literate societies. Survey of shamanism, magic and witchcraft, ritual and symbols, and religious movements. Extensive discussion of ethnographic examples and analysis of social functions of religious institutions.
Survey of anthropological approaches to understanding the logic of structuralism and symbolism in cultural analysis. Focus on how structural and symbolic interpretations relate to cultural and linguistic universals and to the philosophical basis of relativism in the social sciences. (Former ANT 125.)
U.S.-European postmodern condition. "Modernity" as an incomplete project for subordinated groups. Economic, social, technological and political conditions leading to postmodern aesthetics, in comparison with postcolonialism, feminism and minority discourse.
Crucial theories of modernity and post-modernity. How postmodernism is distinct from modernism, why it is related to the collapse of certainty about our collective reality and what it reveals about the status of reason, the self, and collective experience. Readings draw from various philosophical-theoretical, artistic and political literatures. 
Theories of development and current critiques. Colonial legacies and post-colonial realities. Roles of the state and NGOs, population migrations, changing gender identities, cash-earning strategies, and sustainability issues. Stresses importance of cultural understandings in development initiatives. Case studies emphasizing non-industrial societies.
Current Third World and Western development issues concerning women in agriculture, industry, international division of labor, political movements, revolutions, politics of health, education, family and reproduction. Impact of colonialism, capitalism, the world system, and international feminism on women and development.
Survey of approaches to urban living: political structures, organizationcase studies.
Comparative examination of personal kinship, descent, marriage, household and family organizations; the theories that account for variation, and recent advances in the treatment of these data.
Exploration of self, identity, and family systems cross-culturally. Impact of class, gender, race, ethnicity, ruralization, urbanization, and globalization on notions of selfhood in different social/cultural systems.
Recent works in medical anthropology and the science studies of medicine dealing with social and cultural aspects of global health issues such as AIDS, pandemics, clinical trials, cultural differences in illnesses, diabetes, organ trafficking, medical technologies, illness narratives, and others.
Cultural dimensions of recent economic and political developments frequently termed "globalization."
Internal and international migration from an anthropological perspective, including causes, processes, and political, economic, and cultural effects of spatial mobility and displacement.  Emphasizes the interplay of identity, place, and power in diverse cultural and historical contexts.
Analysis of the complex interactions between ecological dynamics and political processes employing the emerging approach of political ecology. Case studies of environmental degradation (e.g., desertification, logging, mineral extraction, petroleum, water) from various cultural and geographic regions.
History of the relationship between anthropology and psychoanalysis. Exploration of anthropology of emotions, colonial psychology, contemporary ethno-psychiatry, studies on personhood, possession, magic, altered states, subjectivity, and definitions of the normal and the pathological in different contexts and cultures.  
Exploration of various oceanic cultures and their engagement with the sea. Piracy, smuggling, exchange, maritime legal regimes, offshore policing, media infrastructures, and ocean ecologies. 
Buddhist meditation and ritual as a cultural system that adapts to global and local forces of change. Anthropological theory and method in understanding global culture transmission, including Buddhist reform movements in Asia and Buddhist practice in the West.
Examining human practices through their inscription in old and new media; evaluating the emergent fields of cyber and digital anthropology; and problematizing terms and concepts routinely deployed in studies of media worldsplatform, social media, hologram, algorithm, remediation, curation, animation.
Overview of the use of film in anthropology and its advantages and limitations in comparison to written ethnographic descriptions. Essential features of ethnographic films. Film production in anthropological research and problems encountered in producing films in the field.
Study and practice of the relation between meditation and cultural conditioning; comparison of Buddhist practice with other cultural constructions of mind, body, brain, thought, emotion, and self.
Basic concepts in and approaches to ethnographic field research. Problem formulation, research design, qualitative and quantitative data collection procedures, and techniques for organizing, retrieving, and analyzing information. Ethnographic description and constructed inference. Students will organize and conduct individual research projects.
Comparative analysis of class/race/gender inequality, concentrating on the ways in which beliefs about descent, "blood," and biological difference interact with property and marital systems to affect the distribution of power in society.
Gender and sexuality in foraging bands, horticultural and pastoral tribes, agricultural and industrial states. Debates on cultural evolution and distribution of gender hierarchies. Impact of politics, economics, religion, social practices, women's movements on gender and sexuality. Culture, nature and sexuality.
Ethnographic survey of West Africa and Congo Basin with analyses of representative societies which illustrate problems of general theoretical concern. Major consideration will be the continuities and discontinuities between periods prior to European contact and the present.
Ethnographic survey of Eastern and Southern Africa with analyses of selected societies which illustrate problems of interest to anthropologists. Major consideration will be given to continuities and discontinuities between periods prior to European contact and the present.
Social, economic, political, and religious lives of Russian, American, Canadian, and Greenlandic Arctic people (Yup'ik, Iupiat, Inuit). Topics include Arctic ecosystems, archaeological record of human occupation, ethnohistorical and ethnographic accounts, arctic people in popular culture, and contemporary issues.
Peoples of the Middle East (including North Africa). Discussions of class relations, kinship organization, sex/gender systems, religious beliefs and behavior, ethnic relations, political systems. Impact of world systems, political and religious movements and social change. (Former ANT 136.)
Patterns of culture and social organization from prehistory to the present, in the context of historical, ecological, economic, and political settings. Emphasis on the relation of ethnic minorities to national states.
Introduction to contemporary social structure of Latin America. Origins, maintenance and changes in inequality: economic responses to poverty, sociocultural responses to discrimination, and political responses to powerlessness.
South Asian cultures and societies with a focus on performance, embodiment, and space from several disciplinary fields. Topics may include colonialism, nationalism, religious traditions, media, popular culture, cities, social movements, modernity, body-cultures, identity, gender, and diasporas.
Recent ethnographies of different nation-states and socio-political spaces in Europe. Topics include the question of old and new boundaries, historical and contemporary constructions of Europe, migration and ethnicity, citizenship, belonging, multiculturalism, and post/socialisms.   
South Asian cinema of last 100 years in the context of cultural, social, and political changes. South Asian history, Independence, Partition, urban life, class, migration, postcolonial identity, diaspora, gender, sexuality, religion, sport, performance, etc.
Examining contemporary Chinese culture and political economy through reading ethnographic studies on recent transformations in rural and urban Chinese society. Special attention is given to state power, popular culture, spatial mobility, city space, and gender.
Origin and relationships of the prosimians, monkeys, and apes.
Nature and results of the evolutionary processes involved in the formation and differentiation of humankind.
Introduction to human genetics. Principles of inheritance, the human genome, population genetics, mutation, genetic diversity, using DNA to study ancient human history, personal genomics. Human genetics as a tool to understand the patterns and processes of human migration. Introduction to the major concepts in human genetic and genomic research.
Introduction to human genetics. Principles of inheritance, the human genome, population genetics, mutation, genetic diversity, using DNA to study ancient human history, personal genomics. Human genetics as a tool to understand the patterns and processes of human migration. Introduction to the major concepts in human genetic and genomic research.
Examines ecological diversity and evolution of social systems of prosimians, monkeys, and apes, placing the social behavior of the primates in the context of appropriate ecological and evolutionary theory.
Examination of the ecology of primates within an evolutionary framework. Theoretical concepts in individual, population, and community ecology, illustrated with primate (and other vertebrate) examples, with additional discussion of primate and rainforest conservation.
Scientific methods of studying, describing and analyzing the behavior and ecology of primates.

Study of the taxonomic, ecological and cultural diversity of Primates and how human activities impact tropical ecosystems. Emphasis on case studies and applied research methods. Includes discussion about career opportunities in conservation.
Human skeleton from archaeological, forensic, and paleontological perspectives, including anatomical nomenclature, variation with sex and age, function, evolution, growth, and development of bones and teeth. Hands-on study and identification of human skeletal remains.
Human skeletons from archaeological, forensic, and paleontological contexts. Bone and tooth structure, growth, and development; measurement, statistics, and biomechanics; assessment of age, sex, weight, height, and ancestry; and indicators of illness, injuries, diet, and activities.
Method and theory of genetic and genomic analysis of molecular evolution of human and non-human primate populations. Special attention to the molecular evolutionary transition to humans and genetic differences among extant human populations and their adaptive significance.
Advanced concepts in human genetics and genomics. Identification of genes underlying human health and disease. Use of genomic data in clinical settings and examination of biases associated with 'personalized medicine." Emphasis on current human genomic technology and critical reading of scientific papers.
Methods for identifying genetic variation in human blood group antigens, serum proteins and red cell enzymes (hemaglutination), general electrophoresis on starch, cellulose acetate and polyacrylamide, immunodiffusion and immunoelectrophoresis on agarase.
Computer lab in human genetics and genomics. Emphasizes hands-on engagement with human genetic/genomic data. Ancestry analysis, pedigrees, de novo Mendelian disease.
Current theoretical frameworks for explaining the evolution of sex differences and for understanding the interrelationship between biological processes and cultural construction of gender roles.
Origins, evolution, and disappearance of Neandertals. Emergence of humans like us in both anatomy and behavior. Interpretation of the fossil and archaeological records of Europe and Africa. Genetics of living and fossil humans.
Introduction to history and development of archeological theory and method, with particular emphasis on the basic dependence of the latter on the former. Stress is on historical development of archaeology in the New World.
Survey of data relating to the peopling of the New World. Cultural adaptation and development of early inhabitants of North and South America.
Survey of the prehistory of Europe from its earliest human inhabitants, to the Neandertals and first modern humans, and through early agricultural and complex societies. Analysis and interpretation of the European archaeological record for understanding human dispersals into Europe.
Prehistory of the Andean region, especially Peru, from the earliest hunting and gathering societies through the Inca. Focus on the use of archaeological data to reconstruct ancient human adaptations to the varied Andean environments.
Description and analysis of the prehistoric peoples of California and the Great Basin from earliest times to European contact.
Description and analysis of the prehistoric peoples of California and the Great Basin from earliest times to European contact.
Survey of prehistory of Africa from early human ancestors, through modern human origins, and into early agricultural and complex societies and the Bantu expansion.  Analysis and interpretation of the African archaeological record, incorporating human paleontology and genetics.
Study and interpretation of the ancient and modern lifeway in which peoples support themselves with primitive technologies and without benefit of domesticated plants and animals.
Survey of the prehistory of Asia from the earliest human occupations to the rise of complex societies. Special focus on fossil and archeological records. 
Theories and methods for studying animal skeletal remains from archaeological sites. Identification and quantification of zooarchaeological material, cultural and natural processes affecting animal bones pre- and postburial, and use of faunal remains for determining past human diets and past environments.
Survey of archeological field methods and techniques. Strategies for survey and site location, mapping of artifacts and features, geophysical techniques, and hand excavation and analysis of stratigraphy.
On-site course using archaeological methods and techniques held at a field location in the western United States, generally California or Nevada. Incorporates basic methods of archaeological survey, mapping, and excavation.
Scientific techniques used to study the chemical and physical properties of archaeological materials. Types of anthropological questions that can be addressed with different methods. Preparation and analysis of archaeological materials.
Museum preparation, advanced field investigation, and guidance in preparation of museum material for publication. 
Examination of the role of lithic, ceramic, textile and wooden implements as elements in prehistoric survival and development. Emphasis is descriptive, but the significance of material resources as factors in prehistoric adaptation, settlement patterns, and culture change are discussed.
Basic concepts of lithic analysis. General introduction on the place of stone tool technology in the archeological record. Physics, terminology and methodological concepts behind the study of stone tools. Review of the development of stone tool technology from its emergence.
Examination of legal foundations and goals of cultural resource management in the United States, with a focus on archaeological resources. Review of state and federal regulations, guidelines for assessing eligibility for listing in the National Register of Historic Places, professional practices to preserve and mitigate damage to resources, and public outreach practices.
Intensive treatment of a special anthropological topic or problem.
Work experience off and on campus in all subject areas offered in the Department of Anthropology under the supervision of a member of the faculty.
Independent study of an anthropological problem involving the writing of an honors thesis.
Leading of small voluntary discussion groups affiliated with one of the department's regular courses. 
Directed reading and group discussion of selected anthropological problems.
Critical readings of selected ethnographies that examine a wide range of important topics and analytical issues in social and cultural anthropology. Emphasis on how and why ethnographic writing has changed over time and its relationship with contemporary theoretical explorations.
Advanced consideration of fundamental issues in anthropological theory.Emphasis on critical examination of major contemporary debates between proponents of competing theories.
Formulation of research problems and preparation of research proposals; relationships between theory and method, funding, pre-fieldwork preparations, entering the community, field research techniques, and problems of ethics; intensive work on proposal writing.
Relationship between conducting participant observation of others andwriting it up,emphasizing the processual rift between the reality of fieldwork and its written representation. Study of various literary genres and textual strategies used in cultural anthropology.
Interdisciplinary seminar evaluating contributions from ecological anthropology, political economy, cultural constructivism, postmodernism, and feminism towards development of theories of political ecology. Historical relationships between local/global power structures, environmental degradation, and resistance movements. Case studies of desertification, deforestation, mining, conservation, development.
Techniques of eliciting, recording, and analyzing; work with a nativespeaker.
Problems of rural transformation arising out of political and economic interaction between national elites and rural regional and local populations under varying conditions of induced change in postcolonial societies. Attention given to the implications of this interaction for rapid economic growth.
Explores the nature of modern cities, urban socioeconomic life, and urban culture and politics from an anthropological perspective.
Selected current methodological and theoretical problems in the analysisof nonindustrial economic systems.
Consideration of approaches to the study of social inequality, and responses of subordinated groups. Emphasis on situating approaches to contemporary social theory, concrete research problems, and political strategies. Topics: formation of consciousness and identity; collective action, accommodation to frontal resistance.
Exploration of one of the core paradigms within contemporary anthropological inquiry, "culture and power." Focus on how distinct theoretical perspectives--Marxism, post-Marxism, structuralism, post-structuralism, and feminism--have examined the mutually constitutive nature of culture and power.
Comparative examination of family systems in historical context and of reproductive behaviors and strategizing. A major theme is how family-system norms specify the relative desirability of differently configured offspring sets. Cases are drawn from Western Europe and South and East Asia.
Interdisciplinary approach to political movements of protest, reform, and revolution emphasizing historical comparison and evaluation of major theoretical approaches including world systems, resource mobilization, state & culture, rational choice, moral economy, social class and gender.
Lectures on the culture aboriginally found north of the Caucasus-Korea line. Supervised study of the primary and secondary sources. Work with informants when available.
Supervised study of the primary and secondary sources dealing with the ethnography and ethnology of the peoples of Europe. Emphasis upon folk, peasant, and minority groups.
Selected topics in the anthropology of Chinese society. Focus on one or more of the following topics: state-society dynamics, family and gender, city formation and urban life, social movement, labor politics, and religion and ideology in Chinese society. 
Concepts, issues, and hypotheses in primate behavioral ecology, with emphasis on the social and ecological determinants and consequences of variation in social organization for individuals.  
Study of selected topics in human evolutionary studies. Each year, focuses on one or more of the following: molecular evolution, primate evolutionary biology, Tertiary hominoids, Australopithecus, Homo erectus, archaic Homo sapiens, brain evolution.
Study of selected topics in human biology.
Analysis of primate behavior, with particular emphasis on preparation for field studies.
Application of understanding of primate biology to conservation of primates and their habitat. Topics include evolutionary anthropology, behavioral ecology, biogeography, macroecology, population biology, and socio-ecology of primates.
Tools and topics in modeling the evolution of social behavior in humans and other animals. Game theory, basic population genetics, animal conflict, altruism, reciprocity, signaling, and group selection. 
Exploration of the links between behavioral ecological theory and human cultural variation, focusing on reproduction, marriage, parental investment and family structure; implications of evolutionary theory for social organization in human communities, historical and contemporary.
Reading and offering workshop critiques of manuscripts submitted for publication, and reading and discussion of other relevant work in anthropology and human ecology. Track and edit published comments and authors replies that accompany major features. Participation in the development of new sections for the electronic edition of the journal, including a "news and views" section and a debate section. 
Topically focused, critical discussion of current and emerging research in the field of human behavioral ecology, giving special attention to theory, concepts, models, and methods for the evolutionary analysis of ethnographic and archaeological evidence.
Intellectual and practical elements of college teaching in the field of Anthropology, from curriculum design and the syllabus through grading and course evaluations, including  classroom and information technology methods, and problems and rewards of teaching in higher education.

Internship experience off and on campus in all subject areas offered in the Department of Anatomy, Physiology & Cell Biology. Internships are supervised by a member of the faculty.

Functional anatomy of major organ systems in vertebrates. Each system examined from cellular to gross level in fish, birds, and mammals. Emphasis on how differentiated cell types are integrated into tissues and organs to perform diverse physiological functions.
Internship experience off and on campus in all subject areas offered in the Department of Anatomy, Physiology & Cell Biology. Internships are supervised by a member of the faculty.


Practical applications of basic microscope techniques used to image cells and tissues with the goal of using these techniques to generate publication quality images. Principles of light, epifluorescent, confocal and electron microscopy, their applications and limitations.
Topics concerning structure and function of respiratory system. Possible topics include: lung growth, pulmonary reaction to toxicants, pulmonary inflammation, lung metabolism, biology of lung cells, tracheobronchial epithelium, nasal cavity structure and function.


Continuation of basic Arabic from ARB 001. Interactive and integrated presentation of listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills, including syntax. Focus on standard Arabic and limited use of spoken Egyptian and/or one other colloquial dialect. 
Continuation of introduction to basic Arabic from ARB 001 and ARB 002. Interactive and integrated presentation of listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills, including syntax. Focus on standard Arabic with limited use of spoken Egyptian and/or one other colloquial dialect.
Builds on courses ARB 001, ARB 002, and ARB 003. Interactive and integrated presentation of listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills, including idiomatic expression. Focus on standard Arabic with limited use of Egyptian and/or one other colloquial dialect. 
Continuation of the Colloquial Egyptian Arabic covered in the first year of Arabic; ARB 001, ARB 002, and ARB 003.
Continuation of colloquial Levantine Arabic presented in ARB 001, ARB 002 and ARB 003. Integrated presentation of speaking and listening skills in colloquial Levantine Arabic, with reading and writing in Modern Standard Arabic that is related to Levantine cultural production and social life.
Continuation of ARB 021. Interactive and integrated presentation of listening, speaking, reading, and writing, including idiomatic expression. Focus on standard Arabic with limited use of Egyptian and/or one other colloquial dialect. 
Continuation of the Colloquial Egyptian Arabic covered in first year of Arabic; courses ARB 001, ARB 002, and ARB 003 and the first quarter of Colloquial Arabic ARB 021C.
Continuation of colloquial Levantine Arabic presented in ARB 021L. Integrated presentation of speaking and listening skills in colloquial Levantine Arabic; reading and writing in Modern Standard Arabic related to Levantine social life.
Continuation of ARB 021 and ARB 022. Interactive and integrated presentation of Arabic listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills, including idiomatic expression.
Continuation of Colloquial Egyptian Arabic covered in ARB 022C.
Continuation of colloquial Levantine Arabic presented in ARB 022L. Integrated presentation of speaking and listening skills in colloquial Levantine Arabic; reading and writing in Modern Standard Arabic related to Levantine social life.
Directed group study. 
Special study. 
Readings in Arabic. Poetry, prose literature, and selections from texts on religion, history, politics, science, philosophy and mysticism. 
Review, refinement, and development of skills learned in intermediate Arabic through work with texts, video, and audio on cultural and social issues. Integrated approach to reading, writing, listening, speaking primarily standard Arabic, with limited use of one colloquial dialect.
Continuation of ARB 121. Further development of advanced skills in reading, listening, writing, and speaking standard Arabic through work with texts, video, and audio on cultural and social issues. Limited use of one colloquial dialect. 
Continuation of ARB 122. Further development of advanced skills in reading, listening, writing, and speaking standard Arabic through work with texts, video, and audio on cultural and social issues. Limited use of one colloquial dialect. 
Readings of modern Arabic poetry and fiction in original format, assisted by instructor-prepared glossaries and other supplementary material. Readings to be followed by class discussion and short writing assignments in Arabic. Open to students at advanced proficiency in Arabic.
Development of reading, writing, speaking, and listening skills in advanced Arabic. Materials may include al-Kitaab Part Two or Three, news articles and broadcasts, short stories, poetry, novels, essays, scripture, prophetic traditions, audio recordings, and television and film. 
Directed Independent Study on a topic culminating in a term paper. Independent Study may only be arranged with consent of the instructor when graduate seminars are unavailable. Topic varies by instructor.


General principles of business law in the areas of contracts, business organization, real property, uniform commercial code, sales, commercial paper, employment relations, and creditor-debtor against a background of the history and functioning of our present legal system.


Theory of individual consumer and market demand; theory of production and supply of agricultural products, with particular reference to the individual firm; price determination, and employment of resources under pure competition.
Price determination, and employment of resources under conditions of monopoly, oligopoly, and monopolistic competition.
Statistical methods for analyzing data to solve problems in managerial economics. Topics include the linear regression model, methods to resolve data problems, and the economic interpretation of results.
Covers state-of-the art econometric and statistical methods for causal and predictive modeling with applications to finance and marketing. 
Covers state-of-the art econometric and statistical methods for causal and predictive modeling with applications to finance and marketing. 
Role of organizational design and behavior in business and public agencies. Principles of planning, decision making, individual behavior, management, leadership, informal groups, conflict and change in the organization. May be taught abroad.
Nature of product marketing by the business firm. Customer-product relationships, pricing and demand; new product development and marketing strategy; promotion and advertising; product life cycles; the distribution system; manufacturing, wholesaling, retailing. Government regulation and restraints.
Major issues encountered in emerging from international poverty, problems of growth and structural change, human welfare, populationgrowth and health, labor markets and internal migration. Important issues of policy concerning international trade and industrialization.
Macroeconomic issues of developing countries. Issues include problems in generating capital, conduct of monetary and fiscal policies, foreign aid and investment. Important issues of policy concerning international borrowing and external debt of developing countries.
Development and application of a framework to understand the tax effects of typical management decisions on both entities and their owners. Impacts that different methods of taxation have on business entities with emphasis on tax planning, using income and deduction strategies, retirement plans, and choice of business entity for tax minimization.
Use of accounting information by mangers in decision making, planning, directing and controlling operations. Focuses on managerial/cost accounting theory and practice. Covers costing systems, budgeting, and financial statement analysis.   
Analytical treatment of historical and current economic problems and governmental policies influencing American agriculture. Uses of economic theory to develop historical and conceptual understanding of the economics of agriculture; how public policy influences the nature and performance of American agriculture.
Analytical treatment of historical and current economic problems and governmental policies influencing agriculture. Uses of economic theory to develop historical and conceptual understanding of the economics of agriculture; how public policy influences the nature and performance of agriculture. May be taught abroad in Australia under the supervision of a UC Davis faculty member.
Application of economic concepts to agro-environmental issues relevant to agricultural sustainability. Topics include market efficiency, production externalities, government policies, agricultural trade, product differentiation, all linked to sustainability issues. Case studies include biofuels, genetically modified foods and geographically differentiated products.
Nature, function, organizational structure, and operation of agricultural markets; prices, costs, and margins; market information, regulation, and controls; cooperative marketing.
Nature, function, organizational structure, and operation of agricultural markets; prices, costs, and margins; market information, regulation, and controls; cooperative marketing.
Study of cooperative business enterprise in the United States and elsewhere; economic theories of behavior, principles of operation, finance, decision-making, and taxation.
Inclusion of non-economic factors such as psychological principles in economic decisions and model predictions. Emphasis on behavioral principles, resulting strategies and implications for diverse market settings.
Fundamental components required to develop a marketing plan. Appreciation of the concept of marketing plans, appropriate researchrequired, including the use of library, Internet, survey and interview instruments, government documents, market analysis, business proposition, action planning, financial evaluation and monitoring.
Application of economic theory and econometrics to the study of marketing and consumer research. Emphasis on industry structure, history, regulatory aspects, integrated brand promotion, market segmentation, optimal product mix, message placement.  
Application of economic theory and econometrics to the study of marketing and consumer research. Emphasis on industry structure, history, regulatory aspects, integrated brand promotion, market segmentation, optimal product mix, message placement.  
Basic nature and scope of international trade in agricultural commodities, agricultural inputs, and natural resources. Market dimensions and policy institutions. Case studies to illustrate import and export problems associated with different regions and commodities.
Basic nature and scope of international trade in agricultural commodities, agricultural inputs, and natural resources. Market dimensions and policy institutions. Case studies to illustrate import and export problems associated with different regions and commodities.
History, mechanics, and economic functions of futures and options markets; hedging; theory of inter-temporal price formation and behavior of futures and options prices; price forecasting; futures and options as policy tools.
Farm organization and resources; economic and technological principles in decision making; analytical techniques and management control; problems in organizing and managing the farm business.
Management of income and expenditures by the household. Use of consumer credit, savings, and insurance by households. Principles of tax, retirement, and estate planning.
Economic theory, analysis, and institutions of real estate markets and related financial markets. Techniques for appraising property values. Cases drawn from the raw land, single family, multifamily, industrial and office real estate markets.  
Variety, nature and impact of government regulation: anti-trust laws and economic and social regulation. Nature of the legislative process, promulgation of regulations, and their impact, especially as analyzed by economists.
Variety, nature and impact of government regulation: anti-trust laws and economic and social regulation. Nature of the legislative process, promulgation of regulations, and their impact, especially as analyzed by economists.
Natural resource use problems with emphasis on past and current policies and institutions affecting resource use; determinants, principles, and patterns of natural resource use; property rights; conservation; private and public resource use problems; and public issues.
Natural resource use problems with emphasis on past and current policies and institutions affecting resource use; determinants, principles, and patterns of natural resource use; property rights; conservation; private and public resource use problems; and public issues.
Analysis of labor markets with focus on U.S. and world agriculture. Labor supply, demand, market equilibrium; why farm labor markets are different; global trends in farm labor; U.S. farm labor history; unions and collective bargaining; immigration policy. 
Introduction to quantitative methods used to analyze business and economic processes: decision analysis for management, mathematical programming, competitive analysis, and other methods.
Linear algebra for economists; necessary and sufficient conditions in static optimization problems; implicit function theorem; economic methodology and mathematics; comparative statics; envelope theorem; Le Chatelier principle; applications to production and consumer models.
Application of economic theory and quantitative methods to analyze operations and production management problems including process strategy, quality management, location and plant layout, and inventory management.
Economic drivers and policy challenges in the major emerging markets, with an emphasis on the effects of rising incomes, population growth, urbanization, and relative wages on world markets and natural resources.
Application of microeconomic theory and econometrics to understand causes of poverty and critically evaluate poverty alleviation policies in low income countries.
Principles of corporate financial management. Time value of money, interest rates, principles of valuation, NPV, risk and return, and cost of capital.
Principles of corporate financial management. Time value of money, interest rates, principles of valuation, NPV, risk and return, and cost of capital.
Financial analysis at the firm level: optimizing capital structure; minimizing the cost of capital; dividend policies; mergers and acquisitions; real options; and risk management.
Financial analysis at the firm level: optimizing capital structure; minimizing the cost of capital; dividend policies; mergers and acquisitions; real options; and risk management.
Introduction to asset pricing. Valuation and risk characteristics of financial assets, including stocks, bonds, futures, and options. Investors attitudes toward risk, capital allocation, portfolio selection, the capital asset pricing model, and the efficient market hypothesis.
Introduction to asset pricing. Valuation and risk characteristics of financial assets, including stocks, bonds, futures, and options. Investors attitudes toward risk, capital allocation, portfolio selection, the capital asset pricing model, and the efficient market hypothesis.
Economic concepts and policy issues associated with natural resources, renewable resources (ground water, forests, fisheries, and wildlife populations) and non-renewable resources (minerals and energy resources, soil). 
Role of the environment in economic activity and methods for protectingand enhancing environmental quality; implications of market failures for public policy; design of environmental policy; theory of welfare measurement; measuring the benefits of environmental improvement.
Selected topics in managerial economics, focusing on current research.  
A program of research culminating in the writing of a senior honors thesis under the direction of a faculty adviser.
A program of research culminating in the writing of a senior honors thesis under the direction of a faculty adviser.
Undergraduates assist the instructor by tutoring students in one of the department's regularly scheduled courses.  
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.

Linear and non-linear optimization theory applied to develop the theory of the profit-maximizing firm and the utility-maximizing consumer.
Characteristics of market equilibrium under perfect competition, simple monopoly and monopsony. Emphasis on general equilibrium and welfare economics; the sources of market success and market failure.
Uncertainty and information economics. Individual decision making under uncertainty. Introduction to game theory, with emphasis on applications to markets with firms that are imperfect competitors or consumers that are imperfectly informed.
Study of philosophy and methodology of applied research in agricultural economics. Methods of conceptualization of researchable topics. Method of communication and constructive criticism.
Application of consumer and producer theory in models of individual behavior and market-level phenomena. Implications of consumer and producer theory for specification of empirical models of supply and demand for inputs and outputs and market equilibrium displacement models.
Application of consumer and producer theory in models of individual behavior and market-level phenomena. Implications of consumer and producer theory for specification of empirical models of supply and demand for inputs and outputs and market equilibrium displacement models.
Third of three courses in the Ph.D. level applied microeconomics sequence. Examines the design of empirical research and the application of econometric theory.
Third of three courses in the Ph.D. level applied microeconomics sequence. Examines the design of empirical research and the application of econometric theory.
Behavior of consumers and producers and their interactions; tools and methods needed to analyze economic behavior in the marketplace.  Application of those methods to real-world problems.  
Behavior in imperfectly competitive markets--monopoly and price discrimination; oligopoly.  Introduction to noncooperative game theory.  Analysis of decisions made under risk and uncertainty and imperfect information.  The economics of externalities and public goods.
Review of the principal theoretical and empirical issues whose analysis has formed development economics. Analysis of economic development theories and development strategies and their application to specific policy issues in developing country contexts.
Agricultural development theory, with a focus on microeconomics. Agricultural household behavior with and without imperfections and uncertainty. Analysis of rural land, labor, credit and insurance markets, institutions, and contracts.
Models and policy approaches regarding trade,monetary and fiscal issues, capital flows and debt are discussed in the macroeconomic framework of an open developing country. Basic analytical focus is real exchange rate and its impact on sectoral allocation of resources.
Extension of development theory and microeconomic methods. Agricultural growth and technological change; poverty and income inequality; multisectoral, including village and regional models. Computable general equilibrium methods and applications.
Interdisciplinary course drawing on theoretical and empirical research on interactions between environmental resource use and economic development processes. Analysis of issues emerging at the interface of environmental and development economics.
Analysis of country interdependence through world agricultural markets. Partial equilibrium analysis is used to study the impacts of national intervention on world markets, national policy choice in an open economy and multinational policy issues. 
Analytic treatment of the historical development and contemporary role of agriculture in the global, U.S. and California economies. Uses economic reasoning and evidence to develop historical and conceptual understanding of the economics of agriculture, agricultural issues, and related government policies.
Analysis of supply and demand for agricultural commodities emphasizing the effective use of microeconomic theory with econometric methods, and other empirical procedures, in conducting applied analysis of supply and demand at the firm and industry level.
Economic analysis of industries that produce, market, transport, store, and process basic commodities. Analysis of market equilibrium under perfect and imperfect competition, with and without government involvement.
Nature, formation, evolution, and institutions of economic policy applied to food, agricultural, and rural issues. Examples for detailedconsideration include food security, commodity issues, and trade policy. Analytical approaches include static and dynamic welfare analysis, policy design, and political-economic analysis.
Prepares students for econometric theory and empirical work by examining the statistical foundation of econometrics. Special attention is paid to problems specific to non-experimental data common to social sciences. Topics from matrix algebra are also covered.
Least squares, instrumental variables, and maximum likelihood estimation and inference for single equation linear regression model; linear restrictions; heteroskedasticity; autocorrelation; lagged dependent variables.
Topics include asymptotic theory and instrumental variables, pooled time-series cross-section estimation, seemingly unrelated regression, classical hypothesis tests, identification and estimation of simultaneous equation models, cointegration, errorcorrection models, and qualitative and limited dependent variable models.
Probability theory; estimation, inference and forecasting of time series models; trends and non-standard asymptotic theory; vector time series methods and cointegration; time series models for higher order moments and transition data; state-space modeling; the Kalman filter.
Estimation and inference for nonlinear regression models for cross-section data; models for discrete data and for limited dependent variables; models for  panel data; additional topics such as bootstrap and semiparametric regression.
Modern econometric techniques for time series data. Expand on topics covered in ECN 240A, ECN 240B and ECN 240C. Contents vary from year to year.
Modern econometrics techniques for cross-section data. Expand on topics covered in ECN 240A, ECN 240B and ECN 240D. Contents vary from year to year.
Necessary and sufficient conditions in the calculus of variations and optimal control, economic interpretations, the dynamic envelope theorem and transversality conditions, infinite horizon problems and phase diagrams, local stability and comparative statics of the steady state, comparative dynamics.
Covers structural econometric models of static games of incomplete information, single-agent dynamic optimization problems and multi-agent dynamic games, with a focus on applications to issues relevant to the environment, energy, natural resources, agriculture, and development.
First of two courses in the Masters-level econometrics sequence. The linear regression model and generalizations are applied to topics in applied economics. Tools for empirical research for problems requiring more sophisticated tools than standard regression models are emphasized.
Second of two courses in the Masters-level econometrics sequence. The linear regression model and generalizations are applied to a variety of topics in applied economics. Tools for empirical research for problems requiring more sophisticated tools than standard regression models are emphasized.
Application of theoretical material covered in ECN 204A and ECN 204B, with particular focus on production theory/factor demand and imperfect competition/market power. Use of theoretical models as a foundation for empirical economic analysis, and empirical exercises. Independent research on chosen topics, with empirical application.
Risk, aversion, choice under uncertainty. Arrow-Debreu securities. Valuation and risk characteristics of financial assets, capital allocation, portfolio selection, Capital Asset Pricing Model, efficient market hypothesis. Applications to topics in agricultural, resource and development economics.  
Development of externality theory, market failure concepts, welfare economics, theory of renewable and non-renewable resource use, and political economic models. Applications to policy issues regarding the agricultural/environment interface and managing resources in the public domain.
Introduces fundamental and recent research in environmental economics, focusing on the design, implementation and evaluation of environmental policy instruments to correct market failures. Exposure to economic theories and empirical techniques frequently used in this field.
Second Ph.D. field course in environmental economics, covering theory and econometrics of methods for valuing non-market goods and environmental quality changes. Topics include revealed preference (travel cost, hedonics, sorting equilibrium) and stated preference (contingent valuation, choice experiments, conjoint analysis) techniques.
Application of capital theory and dynamic methods to issues of optimal use of renewable and nonrenewable resources. Examination of policy issues associated with forests, fisheries, groundwater, energy resources, watersheds, soil, global climate, and wildlife.

Introduction to techniques and concepts in the practice of painting.


Individualized projects exploring color and space in a variety of subject matter and approaches. Builds on basic skills and concepts from beginning drawing and painting courses. Study of historical and contemporary art in relation to studio practice.
Sustained development of painting for advanced students. Approaches will vary according to the instructor.
Advanced painting using the human figure as subject.
Special topics in painting for upper division students. Emphasis on development of a personal practice of painting informed by awareness of contemporary issues in painting and their historical background. Topics will vary with instructor.
Expanded fields of painting and installation art in the context of contemporary art practice. Painting's possibilities in relation to space and pushing the boundaries of two-dimensional art.
Advanced study of drawing composition using black and white media. 
Study of drawing composition in color media.
Intermediate study of drawing composition using three dimensional media.
Exploration of composition and process in drawing. Emphasis on the role of drawing in contemporary art and on drawing as an interdisciplinary practice. 
Study of the figure through drawing of the model. Exploration of different methods and process of figure-drawing.
Introduction to 35mm and medium format camera. Development of personal aesthetic and portfolio of black and white prints.
Comprehensive introduction to all elements of digital photography, including scanning, imaging software and printing.
Effects of lighting on photographic image. Ability to read, utilize, modify natural lighting conditions. Studio lighting equipment, and use of photographic studio. Photographic production management.
History and practice of photographic book. Sequencing, use of text and image, page layout and book binding techniques. Development of major photographic project.
Second course in ART 110D series. History and practice of photographic book. Sequencing, use of text and image, page layout and book binding techniques. Development of major photographic project.
Special topics related to photography and contemporary art practice. Multiple projects in a variety of approaches.
In-depth exploration of digital photography, including refined digital imaging techniques. Theoretical issues involved in digital media.  
Sound composition and development of an audio databank. Study of repetition and phase shifts. Creation of descriptive acoustic space recordings in combination with other artistic media. Audio as stand alone or accompaniment.
Experimental interdisciplinary strategies. Use of various media in creation of collaborative or independent works. Production of participatory audio-visual works, installations, or two dimensional explorations.
Exploration of animation. Relationship between drawing, digital stills, and multiple images. Animation using traditional drawing techniques, collage, and digital processes.
Experimental documentary practice. Use of interviews, voice-overs, and still and moving images. Production of alternative conceptual and visual projects.  
Use of video to expand performance art production. Exploration of improvisation, direction, projection, and image processing in real time.
Independently driven video, digital, and/or performance projects. Further development in the electronic arts ranging from video installation to performance.
Interpretation of landscape through painting, drawing, and related media. Emphasis on the integration of historical, cultural, natural, and artistic contexts. 
Woodcut linocut, metal-plate, relief, and experimental uses of other materials for printmaking. Additive and reductive relief techniques.
Metal plate etching, aquatint, hard and soft ground, burin engraving and related printmaking techniques. 
Stone and metal-plate lithography and other planographic printmaking methods. Exploration of the basic chemistry and printing procedure inherent in stone lithogrphay.
Printmaking techniques in silk screen and related stencil methods. Development of visual imagery using the language of printmaking.
Development of intermedia printmaking. Advanced modes in print technologies: relief, serigraphy, intaglio, surface, as well as addition of digitized imagery. Production of prints using multi-plate prints and other methods.
Creation of an artist's book in an edition of three. Use of a variety of media.
Ceramic sculpture creation using two forms of industrial processes: plaster mold design, fabrication and casting; and extrusion with dies, including die fabrication.
Study of ceramic materials and processes. Areas studied include clay and clay bodies; glaze materials through temperature, color and texture; history and technology of kilns and kiln firing. Examination of material properties and characteristics through experimentation.  
Exploration of the ceramic surface for creative expression. Use of glazing techniques including china paint, decals, luster, and silkscreen with underglaze and overglaze as well as the use of common materials such as epoxy, paint, oil and wax.
Experimentation with all techniques learned in prerequisite ceramics classes. Includes class projects in consultation with faculty. 
Development of camera vision, ideas, and aesthetics and their relationship to the fine arts from 1839 to the present.  
Study of forms and symbols in historic and contemporary masterpieces.
Study of electronic media, focusing on critique, application, and relationship to art practice. Analysis of the conceptual basis of electronic media as an artistic mode of expression. 
Individualized explorations through multiple projects in a variety of sculpture media and techniques. Builds upon technical skills and concepts covered in ART 005.
Sculpture for advanced students. Emphasis on concept, idea development and honing technical skills. Approaches and projects will vary according to the instructor.
Primary application and exploration of a single sculpture material chosen by the student. Examination of its properties, qualities, and characteristics for three-dimensional expression.
Investigation of a specific idea chosen by the class. Relationship of idea to form and content. Individual development of conceptual awareness.
Technical aspects of the use of metals in contemporary art practice. Projects assigned to demonstrate the evolution of concepts and processes.
Place and site specificity in contemporary sculpture. Individual and group work to conceive and fabricate sculpture in a public space.
Exploration of historical and contemporary approaches to the body in three-dimensions. Projects based on observational and conceptual strategies. Variety of media and techniques, including clay, wax, plaster, plastics, found objects, and others.
Exploration of scale, from the very small to the very large in a series of projects in a variety of media. Tools and techniques of enlargement and miniaturization.
The Mural: a collective art process that empowers students and people through design and execution of mural paintings in the tradition of the Mexican Mural Movement; introduces materials and techniques.
Introduction to professional practices. Development of an artist's packet including a resume, cover letter, artist statement, and statement of purpose. Ongoing independent studio work with group critiques. Research on galleries and museums, and readings in contemporary theory and criticism.
Exploration of the expanded field of practice, theory and criticism in the visual arts. Presentations and discussions with professional practitioners in the field. 


Supervised internship in community and institutional settings related to Asian American concerns.
Explores major theories of race and its intersections with class, gender, and sexuality from interdisciplinary perspective. Introduces key theoretical developments, issues, debates. Through case studies, analyzes ways various theoretical frameworks and perspectives have been incorporated into range of scholarship. 
Supervised internship in community and institutional settings related to Asian American concerns.
Tutoring in lower division Asian American Studies courses in small group discussion. Weekly meetings with instructor.
Primarily intended for upper division students.
Special study for advanced undergraduates.
Student facilitated. Under the supervision of a faculty member, an undergraduate student teaches a course under 098F/198F.
Description and interpretation of astronomical phenomena using the laws of modern physics and observations by modern astronomical instruments. Gravity, relativity, electromagnetic radiation, atomic and nuclear processes in relation to the structure and evolution of stars, galaxies and the universe.
Introduction to physical principles of severe and unusual weather: flood, blizzards, thunderstorms, lightning, tornadoes, and hurricanes. Emphasis on scientific perspective and human context. Not open to students who have received credit for ATM 100. (Former ATM 100.)
Fundamental principles of the physics, chemistry, and fluid dynamics underlying weather and climate. Solar radiation, the greenhouse effect, and the thermal budget of the Earth. Clouds and their formation, convection, precipitation, mid-latitude storm systems.
Internship off and on campus in atmospheric science. Internship supervised by a member of the faculty.

Acquisition, distribution and analysis of meteorological data. Vertical sounding analysis, stability indices, probability of local severe weather, weather map analysis. Use of National Weather Service analyses and forecast products. Laboratory makes use of computer-generated analyses.
Tools for analyzing observed properties of mid-latitude weather systems. The analysis-forecast system, including various weather forecast models. General structure and properties of mid-latitude weather systems. 
Subjective and objective analysis of weather data. Web-based learning of the analysis-forecast system and various weather forecasting situations. Weather map interpretation and forecast discussions.
Formal practice in preparing local weather forecasts. Analysis of current weather conditions and recent model performance. Verificationand discussion of prior forecast. Interpretation of current forecast model guidance. Posting of forecast.
Examination of climate as the forcing function for the hydrologic system. Emphasis on seasonal variations in the relationship between precipitation and evapotranspiration for meso-scale areas. Watershed modeling of floods and drought for evaluating the effects of climaticfluctuations.
Atmospheric composition and structure, thermodynamics of atmospheric gases, thermal properties of dry and moist air, atmospheric stability; cloud nucleation, cloud growth by condensation and collision, cloud models. 
Fundamental forces of atmospheric flow; noninertial reference frames; development of the equations of motion for rotating stratified atmospheres; isobaric and natural coordinate systems; geostrophic flow; thermal wind; circulation and vorticity.   
Dynamics of fluid motion in geophysical systems; quasi-geostrophic theory; fundamentals of wave propagation in fluids; Rossby waves; gravity waves; fundamentals of hydrodynamic instability; two-level model; baroclinic instability and cyclogenesis.
Modern meteorological instruments and their use in meteorological observations and measurements. Both standard and micrometeorological instruments are included.
Concepts of atmospheric radiation and the use of satellites in remote sensing. Emphasis on the modification of solar and infrared radiation by the atmosphere. Estimation from satellite data of atmospheric variables such as temperatures and cloudiness.
Atmospheric and biological interactions.  Physical and biological basis for water vapor, carbon dioxide and energy exchanges with the atmosphere associated with plants and animals, including humans.  Microclimate of plant canopies and microclimatic modification such as frost protection and windbreaks.
Physical and technical aspects of air pollution. Emphasis on geophysical processes and air pollution meteorology as well as physical and chemical properties of pollutants.
Computational techniques used in physical sciences. Integral and differential equation numerical solution: mainly finite differencing and spectral (Fourier transform) methods. Time series applications (time-permitting). Specific applications drawn from meteorology. Accelerated introduction to FORTRAN including programming assignments. 
Dynamics of the atmosphere nearest the Earth's surface. Friction and heat transfer. Properties of turbulent flows; statistical and spectral techniques; use and interpretation of differential equations. Emphasis on the importance to weather, air pollution, and the world's oceans.
Quantitative examination of current local, regional and global problems in atmospheric chemistry (including photochemical smog, acid deposition, climate change, and stratospheric ozone depletion) using fundamental concepts from chemistry. Basic chemical modeling of atmospheric reaction systems.
Internship off and on campus in atmospheric science. Internship supervised by a member of the faculty.


Theoretical and applied aspects of energy and mass fluxes linking the earth's surface, atmosphere, and hydrologic system. Emphasis on regional scale analysis and modeling, spatial data representation, and climate change influences on precipitation and its hydroclimatic expression.
Conditions for instability in stratified atmospheres; baroclinic instability; forced topographic Rossby Waves; wave-mean flow interaction theory; tropical dynamics; stratospheric dynamics.
Characteristics of the atmospheric boundary layer under convective and nocturnal conditions. Heat budget at the surface and boundary layer forcing. Similarity theory and scaling of the boundary layer. Measurement and simulation techniques.
Dynamics and energetics of turbulence in the atmosphere including vorticity dynamics. Statistical description of turbulence; Eulerian and Lagrangian scales, spectral analysis, conditional sampling techniques. Turbulent diffusion; the closure problem, gradient-diffusion and second-order methods.
Processes determining transport and diffusion of primary and secondary pollutants. Models of chemical transformation, of the atmospheric boundary layer and of mesoscale wind fields, as applicable to pollutant dispersion problems.
Current topics in biometeorology. Physical and biological basis for water vapor, other gases, and energy exchange with the atmosphere. Topics include modeling and measuring turbulent transport from plant canopies, surface temperatures and energy budgets, bio-aerosol physics and aerobiology.
Large-scale, observed atmospheric properties. Radiation, momentum, and energy balances derived and compared with observations. Lectures and homework synthesize observations and theories, then apply them to understand the large-scale circulations.
Dynamics of large-scale climatic variations over time periods from weeks to centuries. Description of the appropriate methods of analysis of atmospheric and oceanic observations. Conservation of mass, energy and momentum. Introduction to the range of climate simulations.
The study of weather phenomena with horizontal spatial dimensions between 2.5 and 2500 kilometers. Methods of observational study and numerical modeling of the structure and temporal behavior of these weather systems.
Principles of numerical modeling of the dynamic, thermodynamic and physical processes of the atmosphere. Hands-on experiments on model development using the shallow water equations and the primitive equations. Operational forecast models.
Chemistry and photochemistry in tropospheric condensed phases (fog, cloud, and rain drops and aerosol particles). Gas-drop and gas-particle partitioning of compounds and effects of reactions in condensed phases on the fates and transformations of tropospheric chemical species.
Over the past fifty years, global models have given us incredible insight into the Earth system. Provides an introduction to these models, with a focus on their design and the science questions they have been built to address.
Over the past fifty years, global models have given us incredible insight into the Earth system. Provides an introduction to these models, with a focus on their design and the science questions they have been built to address.
In-depth investigation of an air quality problem with a team and mentor from government or industry. Science, engineering and policy will be involved. Findings will be presented orally and in writing. (Deferred grading only, pending completion of sequence.)
In-depth investigation of an air quality problem with a team and mentor from government or industry. Science, engineering and policy will be involved. Findings will be presented orally and in writing. (Deferred grading only, pending completion of sequence.)
Current developments in selected areas of atmospheric research. Topics will vary according to student and faculty interests.
Review and discussion of current literature and research in Air Quality Meteorology.
Review and discussion of current literature and research in Biometeorology.
Review and discussion of current literature and research in Boundary Layer Meteorology.
Review and discussion of current literature and research in Climate Change.
Review and discussion of current literature and research in General Meteorology.
Review and discussion of current literature and research in Atmospheric Chemistry. 




One weekly discussion and field trip to study practical captive management (housing, feeding, equipment, marketing, diseases). Visit facilities rearing birds such as commercial parrots, hobbyist exotics, ostrich, raptors, waterfowl, game birds, poultry and pigeons.
Identify raptors: study of effects of weather, crops, agricultural practices on fluctuations in raptor species and numbers. Familiarize with literature; design a project; survey study sites; collect, computerize, analyze data, compare with previous years. Species, observations, emphasis different each quarter. One Saturday field trip.
Identify raptors: study of effects of weather, crops, agricultural practices on fluctuations in raptor species and numbers. Familiarize with literature; design a project; survey study sites; collect, computerize, analyze data, compare with previous years. Species, observations, emphasis different each quarter. One Saturday field trip.
Identify raptors: study of effects of weather, crops, agricultural practices on fluctuations in raptor species and numbers. Familiarize with literature; design a project; survey study sites; collect, computerize, analyze data, compare with previous years. Species, observations, emphasis different each quarter. One Saturday field trip.
Internship on and off campus in poultry, game birds or exotic bird production, management and research; or in a business, industry, or agency concerned with these entities. Compliance with Internship Approval form essential.


Biology of domesticated poultry, specifically chickens and turkeys. Avian genetics, immunology, reproduction, growth and development, broiler and layer management. 
Unique features of avian development and genomics: Incubation; Staging; Egg Structure/Function; Fertilization; Pre-oviposital; Oviposition, Cold Torpor; Post-oviposital Development; Organogenesis, Growth; Sexual Differentiation; Extraembryonic Membranes; Mortality/Hatching; Genome Organization; Comparative Avian Genomics; Telomere Biology; Sex Chromosomes/Sex Determination; Advanced Technologies; Genome Manipulation; Mutations.
Study of birds of prey: classification, distribution, habits, migration, unique anatomical and physiological adaptations, natural and captive breeding, health and diseases, environmental concerns, conservation, legal considerations, rehabilitation, and falconry. Includes two Saturday field trips.
Breeding cycles and reproductive strategies, egg and sperm formation, incubation, sexual development, imprinting, hormonal control of reproductive behavior and song. Species coverage includes wild and companion birds. Course has a physiological orientation.
Captive propagation of birds, including reproduction, genetic management, health, feeding, artificial incubation, artificial insemination, and related legal aspects, including trade and smuggling. Emphasis on exotic species and the role of captive propagation in conservation.
Management of commercial table egg flocks as related to environment, nutrition, disease control, economics, housing, equipment, egg processing and raising replacement pullets. Offered in alternate years. One Saturday field trip required.
Principles of nutrition specific to avian species, including feedstuffs, feed additives, nutrient metabolism, energy systems, and nutritional support of egg production and growth. Use of computers for feed formulation to support production.
Experiments in current problems in avian biology. Introduction to experimental design. Students choose a project, design a protocol, perform an experiment and report their findings.
Ecology, behavior, functional morphology and lifehistory evolution of birds. Emphasis on the importance of body size as a principle determinant of most aspects of avian performance from lifespan to reproduction and species abundance. Analytical synthesis and critical thought emphasized. 

Internship on and off campus in poultry, game birds or exotic bird production, management and research; or in a business, industry, or agency concerned with these entities. Compliance with Internship Approval form essential.
Discussion of topics of current interest in avian sciences.
Tutoring of students in lower division avian sciences courses; weekly conference with instructors in charge of courses; written critiques of teaching procedures.
Directed group study. 
In consultation with the instructor, students develop a lecture and associated instructional materials, i.e., lesson plan, including justification, reading and presentation and evaluation aids. Topic must complement a topic covered in AVS 103.
Major professors lead research discussions with their graduate students. Research papers are reviewed and project proposalspresented and evaluated. Format will combine seminar and discussion.
Tutoring of students in lower, upper division, and graduate courses in Avian Sciences; weekly conference with instructor in charge of course; written critiques of teaching methods in lectures and laboratories. 


Emphasizes molecular genetic and genomic approaches to address fundamental biological questions. Introduces and emphasizes the strengths of prokaryotic and eukaryotic model systems and serves as building block for the BMCDB core courses, which use model systems to develop their themes.
Conceptual and quantitative basis for macromolecular structure-function relationships. Investigation of the paradigm form follows function. Review of key elements of protein, nucleic acid, and membrane structure. Exploration of specific macromolecular associations by analyzing chemical structure and physical-chemical behavior.
Analysis of basic processes governing cell organization, division, and transport. Study of the integration and regulation of cell behavior in response to changes in cellular environment.
Fundamental principles in embryonic development that guide application of modern cellular and genetic approaches to understand developmental mechanisms. Emphasis on experimental approaches used to critically address scientific questions.
Investigation of the basic cellular processes in prokaryotes and eukaryotes that govern the central dogma of molecular biology (DNA-RNA-protein).
Development of critical reading skills through study of major paradigm advances in specialized fields of biochemistry, molecular, cell, and developmental biology. Emphasis on active learning and student participation. Guided analysis of literature and major advances in field of study. 
Two five-week assignments in BMCDB research laboratories. Individual research problems with emphasis on methodological/procedural experience, experimental design, proposal writing and oral communication of results. 
Analysis of the early events of development including: germ cells and other stem cells, gametogenesis, meiosis, imprinting, fertilization, genetically-engineered organisms, egg activation and establishment of embryonic polarity with focus on cellular events including gene regulation and cell signaling.
Genetic and molecular analysis of mechanisms that control animal development after fertilization.  Establishment of embryonic axes, cell fate and embryonic pattern; induction, apoptosis, tissue patterning. Critical reading of current literature in C.elegans, Drosophila, and mouse genetic model systems.
Analysis of the pathologic alterations of cancer cells and therapeutic opportunities; with emphasis on animal models, tumor immunotherapy, stress response, metabolism, epigenetics, microRNAs and non-coding RNAs, and microbiota and inflammation.
Genetic and molecular alterations underlying the conversion of normal cells to cancers, emphasizing regulatory mechanisms and pathways. Critical reading of the current literature and development of experimental approaches.  
Presentation and discussion of faculty and graduate-student research.
Group Study
Research
Supervised work experience in biological chemistry and related fields
Supervised work experience in Biological Chemistry and related fields.
For undergraduate students desiring to explore particular topics in depth. Lecture and conferences may be involved.

Oxidative desaturation/elongation of polyunsaturated fatty acids. Biosynthesis of prostaglandins/leukotrienes from polyunsaturated fatty acids. Chemistry, biochemistry, and metabolism. Nutritional regulation. Physiological/pathophysiological implications; pharmacological and clinical relevance.
Advanced treatment of molecular biology and genetics of filamentous fungi and yeasts, including gene structure, organization and regulation; secretion; control of reproduction; molecular evolution; transformation; and gene manipulation.
Molecular mechanisms of protein synthesis and translational control in eukaryotic cells, with emphasis on mammalian cells and their viruses. An advanced graduate-level treatment of topics of current interest, with readings and discussion of primary papers from the literature.
Basic theory, experimental methods, and instrumentation of NMR. Enables understanding of NMR spectroscopy and imaging experiments.
Principles and applications of magnetic resonance in biomedicine. Fundamental concepts and the biophysical basis for magnetic resonanceapplications in areas of tissue characterization/imaging, metabolic regulation, and cellular bioenergetics.
Current genetic approaches to understanding the pathogenesis of disease and mammalian development presented and critically discussed by faculty, fellows and students. Topics include Mendelian and non-Mendelian diseases, imprinting, homologous recombination, statistical methods, genetic epidemiology and cell cycle dependent expression.
For graduate students desiring to explore particular topics in depth. Lectures and conferences may be involved.

Biochemistry of proteins and nucleic acids. Includes an introduction to cancer biology and a full discussion of carbohydrate metabolism. Molecular aspects of human disease are highlighted throughout.
Current genetic approaches to understanding the pathogenesis of disease and mammalian development presented and critically discussed by faculty, fellows and students. Topics include Mendelian and non-Mendelian diseases, imprinting, homologous recombination, statistical methods, genetic epidemiology and cell cycle dependent expression.
Four-week module will focus on the clinical methods and applications of medical genomics. Topics will include an introduction to the human genome and human genomics, genetic and epigenetic variation and the ethics of medical genomics.
Assist instructor by tutoring medical students in preparation for one of the departmental courses that is a component of the required curriculum of the School of Medicine.

Research with Department of Biological Chemistry.
Basic principles of mass, energy and momentum conservation equations applied to solve problems in the biological and medical sciences.
Basic principles of mass, energy and momentum conservation equations applied to solve problems in the biological and medical sciences.
Topics in Biomedical Engineering. (A) Cellular and Molecular Engineering.
Topics in Biomedical Engineering. (B) Biomedical Imaging.
Topics in Biomedical Engineering. (C) Biomedical Engineering. 
Fundamental cell biology for bioengineers. Emphasis on physical concepts underlying cellular processes including protein trafficking, cell motility, cell division and cell adhesion. Current topics including cell biology of cancer and stem cells will be discussed.
Concepts of probability, random variables and processes, and statistical analysis with applications to engineering problems in biomedical sciences. Includes discrete and continuous random variables, probability distributions and models, hypothesis testing, statistical inference and Matlab applications. Emphasis on BME applications.
Principles of momentum and mass transfer with applications to biomedical systems; emphasis on basic fluid transport related to blood flow, mass transfer across cell membranes, and the design and analysis of artificial human organs.
Principles of momentum and mass transfer with applications to biomedical systems; emphasis on basic fluid transport related to blood flow, mass transfer across cell membranes, and the design and analysis of artificial human organs.
Mathematical and computational modeling to solve biomedical problems. Topics include stochastic processes and Monte Carlo simulations, and partial differential equations. Introduced to numerical techniques in MATLAB.
Systems and control theory applied to biomedical engineering problems. Time-domain and frequency-domain analyses of signals and systems, convolution, Laplace and Fourier transforms, transfer function, dynamic behavior of first and second order processes, and design of control systems for biomedical applications.
Systems and control theory applied to biomedical engineering problems. Time-domain and frequency-domain analyses of signals and systems, convolution, Laplace and Fourier transforms, transfer function, dynamic behavior of first and second order processes, and design of control systems for biomedical applications.
Introduce important concepts for design, selection and application of biomaterials. Given the interdisciplinary nature of the subject, principles of polymer science, surface science, materials science and biology will be integrated into the course.
Application of bioengineering theory and experimental analysis to a design project culminating in the design of a unique solution to a problem. Design may be geared towards current applications in biotechnology or medical technology. Continues in BIM 110B.
Application of bioengineering theory and experimental analysis to a design project culminating in the design of a unique solution to a problem. Design may be geared towards current applications in biotechnology or medical technology.
Manufacturing processes, safety, computer-aided design techniques applied to fabrication of biomedical devices. Application of engineering principles & design theory to build a functional prototype to solve a biomedical problem. Continues in 110AB.
Manufacturing processes, safety, computer-aided design techniques applied to fabrication of biomedical devices. 
Basic biomedical signals and sensors. Topics include analog and digital records using electronic, hydrodynamic, and optical sensors, and measurements made at cellular, tissue and whole organism level.  
Basic human physiology for the nervous, musculoskeletal, cardiovascular, respiratory, gastrointestinal, renal, and endocrine systems. Emphasis on small group design projects and presentations in interdisciplinary topics relating biomedical engineering to medical diagnostic and therapeutic applications.
Non-simulation strategies for modeling biomedical engineering systems, including natural and synthetic systems at the cell and molecular level. Formulating and testing hypotheses by translating real-world problems into appropriate mathematical models, translating mathematical results into real-world understanding, and gaining appreciation for how models contribute to the development cycle of biomedical engineering applications.  
Introduction to the theory and practice of micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS), including fundamentals of micro-nanofabrication, microscale sensing and actuation, self assembly, microfluidics and lab-on-a-chip. Weekly hands-on laboratory sections are emphasized on implementation and utilization of MEMS technologies.
Historical perspective on materials usage in the body. Fundamental properties of materials and key considerations needed for material selection in the context of biomedical applications. Case studies of commonly used biomaterials spanning a range of material types. 
Historical perspective on materials usage in the body. Fundamental properties of materials and key considerations needed for material selection in the context of biomedical applications. Case studies of commonly used biomaterials spanning a range of material types. 
Basic concepts and methods in design of experiments with biomedical engineering applications. Statistical concepts and methods to study strategies to design efficient industrial experiments that can improve data quality and simplify data analysis. 
Structural and mechanical properties of biological tissues, including bone, cartilage, ligaments, tendons, nerves, and skeletal muscle.
Introduction to protein structure and function. Modern methods for designing, producing, and characterizing novel proteins and peptides. Design strategies, computer modeling, heterologous expression, in vitro mutagenesis. Protein crystallography, spectroscopic and calorimetric methods for characterization, and other techniques.
Optional hands-on laboratory for BIM 140. Students use the engineering design process to design, build, and test a solution to a practical problem in the field of protein engineering. Problems change each offering. 
Mechanical properties that govern blood flow in the microcirculation. Concepts in blood rheology and cell and tissue viscoelasticity, biophysical aspects of cell migration, adhesion, and motility.
Basic physics, engineering principles, and applications of biomedical imaging techniques including x-ray imaging, computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, ultrasound and nuclear imaging.
Basic physics, engineering principles, and applications of biomedical imaging techniques including x-ray imaging, computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, ultrasound and nuclear imaging.
Includes analysis, design, construction and characterization of molecular systems. Process and biological parts standardization, computer aided design, gene synthesis, directed evolution, protein engineering, issues of human practice, biological safety, security, innovation, and ethics are covered.
Optional hands-on laboratory for BIM 143. Students solve a practical problem in the field of synthetic biology by designing, building, and testing an appropriate solution or product. Problems change each offering.
Biophotonics and bioimaging, emphasizing quantitative description of light propagation & light tissue interactions. Key technologies and illustrative applications in basic research, clinical diagnostics and therapy. 
Biophotonics and bioimaging, emphasizing quantitative description of light propagation & light tissue interactions. Key technologies and illustrative applications in basic research, clinical diagnostics and therapy. 
Basic immunology and immunological tools. Survey of current immuno-therapeutic strategies. Ongoing research efforts to engineer the immune system for positive diagnostic and therapeutic outcomes.
Structural, mechanical and dynamic properties of DNA. Topics include DNA structures and their mechanical properties, in vivo topological constraints on DNA, mechanical and thermodynamic equilibria, DNA dynamics, and their roles in normal and pathological biological processes.
Fundamentals of molecular biomedicine covering state-of-the-art methods for quantitative understanding of gene regulation and signal transduction networks at different levels of organization in health and disease. Topics include classic genetic systems, synthetic circuits, networks disrupted in disease and cancer.
Fundamentals of molecular biomedicine covering state-of-the-art methods for quantitative understanding of gene regulation and signal transduction networks at different levels of organization in health and disease. Topics include classic genetic systems, synthetic circuits, networks disrupted in disease and cancer.
Introduction to the basic concepts and techniques of biomolecular engineering such as recombinant DNA technology, protein engineering, and molecular diagnostics.
Introduction to the basic techniques in biomolecular engineering. Lectures, laboratory, and discussion sessions will cover basic techniques in DNA cloning, bacterial cell culture, gene regulation, protein expression, and data analysis.
Basic concepts and techniques in biomolecular analysis, recombinant DNA technology, and protein purification and analysis.
Introduction to fundamental physical mechanisms governing structure and function of bio-macromolecules. Emphasis on a quantitative understanding of the nano- to microscale biomechanics of interactions between and within individual molecules, as well as of their assemblies, in particular membranes.
Introduction to fundamental physical mechanisms governing structure and function of bio-macromolecules. Emphasis on a quantitative understanding of the nano- to microscale biomechanics of interactions between and within individual molecules, as well as of their assemblies, in particular membranes.
Fundamentals of bioelectricity in cells, the calcium signaling system, and mechanical force generation in muscle. Combination of lecture and projects to promote learning of important concepts in hands-on projects using neurons and muscle as microcosms.       
Fundamentals of bioelectricity in cells, the calcium signaling system, and mechanical force generation in muscle. Combination of lecture and projects to promote learning of important concepts in hands-on projects using neurons and muscle as microcosms.       
Theories of fluid mechanics, including Navier Stokes Equation and Conservation Laws, will be presented to understand dynamics of human circulatory systems. Fluid dynamics will be analyzed using partial differential equations. 
Survey of medical device design & impact on manufacturing operations. Introduction to medical device design process & product lifecycle. Principles of Design for Manufacturability, Design for Lean Manufacturing, and quality management systems.
Clinical applications for biomedical devices with emphasis in the pathophysiology of common diseases as it relates to the biodesign process, biosensors principles, in vitro diagnostics, needs assessment, and regulatory considerations. 
Engineering principles to direct cell and tissue behavior and formation. Cell sourcing, controlled delivery of macromolecules, transport within and around biomaterials, bioreactor design, tissue design criteria and outcomes assessment.   
Hands-on design module to introduce microcontroller platforms, e.g., Arduino; programming microcontroller development board, use of external programs to support development of controlled systems, design of simple control systems.
Theory and practice of microfluidic and lab-on-a-chip (LOC) systems. Microfluidic theories, microfluidic functions and operations, microfluidic sensing, and organ-on-a-chip development. Laboratory sections emphasize implementation and utilization of modern microfluidic devices, interfacial phenomena, and digital and droplet microfluidics.
Topics in Biomedical Engineering: Cellular & Molecular Engineering.
Topics in Biomedical Engineering: Biomedical Imaging.  
Topics in Biomedical Engineering: Biomedical Engineering.
Supervised work experience in the Biomedical Engineering field.
Special study for advanced undergraduates.
Designed to improve the written and oral communication skills of first-year graduate students through writing fellowship proposals, analyzing data, and critically reviewing research papers.
Preparation for research and critical review in the field of cell and molecular biology for biomedical or applied science engineers Emphasis on biophysical and engineering concepts intrinsic to specific topics including receptor-ligand dynamics in cell signaling and function, cell motility, DNA replication and RNA processing, cellular energetics and protein sorting. Modern topics in bioinformatics and proteomics.
Basic human physiology of the nervous, muscular, cardiovascular, respiratory, and renal systems and their interactions; Emphasis on the physical and engineering principles governing these systems, including control and transport processes, fluid dynamics, and electrochemistry. 
Mechanical and atomic properties of metallic,ceramic, and polymeric implant materials of metallic, ceramic, and polymeric implant materials; corrosion, degradation, and failure of implants; inflammation, wound and fracture healing, blood coagulation; properties of bones, joints, and blood vessels; biocompatibility of orthopaedic and cardiovascular materials.
Design, selection and application of polymeric biomaterials. Integration of the principles of polymer science, surface science, materials science and biology.
Application of principles of heat and mass transfer to biomedical systems related to heat exchange between the biomedical system and its environment, mass transfer across cell membranes and the design and analysis of artificial human organs.
Biological sensors based on principles of electrochemical, optical and affinity detection. Methods for integration of sensing elements (e.g. enzymes) into biosensors and miniaturization of biosensors.
Continuum mechanics relevant to bioengineering. Concepts in tensor calculus, kinematics, stress and strain, and constitutive theories of continua. Selected topics in bone, articular cartilage, blood/circulation, and cell biomechanics will illustrate the derivation of appropriate continuum mechanics theories.
Advanced research strategies and technologies used in the study of immune function and inflammation. Static and dynamic measurements of stress, strain, and molecular scale forces in blood and vascular cells, as well as genetic approaches to the study of disease.
Principles by which biomechanical forces affect cell and tissue function to impact human health and disease. Emphasis on cardiovascular system: structure and function, biofluid mechanics and mechanotransduction, disease mechanisms and research methods. Cartilage, bone and other systems; current topics discussed.
Fundamental engineering and biotechnology principles critical for the formulation and delivery of therapeutic agents, including peptide/protein drugs and small molecules.
Current topics in cytoskeletal mechanics including physical properties of the cytoskeleton and motor proteins, molecular force sensor and generator, cytoskeletal regulation of cell motility and adhesion.
Coupled rigid-body kinematics/dynamics; reference frames; vector differentiation; configuration and motion constraints; holonomicity; generalized speeds; partial velocities; mass; inertia tensor/theorems;angular momentum; generalized forces; comparing Newton/Euler, Lagrange's, Kane's methods; computer-aided equation derivation; orientation; Euler; Rodrigues parameters.
Spatial kinematics, screw theory, spatial mechanisms analysis and synthesis, robot kinematics and dynamics, robot workspace, path planning, robot programming, real-time architecture and software implementation.
Basic structure and function of skeletal muscle examined at the microscopic and macroscopic level. Muscle adaptation in response to aging, disease, injury, exercise, and disuse. Analytic models of muscle function are discussed.
Overview of the mechanical properties of the various tissues in the musculoskeletal system, the relationship of these properties toanatomic and histologic structure, and the changes in these properties caused by aging and disuse. 
Introduction to advanced finite elements and design optimization methods, with application to modeling of complex mechanical, aerospace and biomedical systems. Application of states of the art in finite elements in optimum design of components under realistic loading conditions and constraints.
Deformation of solids and the motion of fluids treated with state-of-the-art computational methods. Numerical treatment of nonlinear dynamics; classification of coupled problems; applications of finite element methods to mechanical, aeronautical, and biological systems.
Equipment, methods, medical applications of MRI. Lectures review basic, advanced pulse sequences, image reconstruction, display and technology and how these are applied clinically. Lecture complements a more technical course. BIM 246 can be taken concurrently.
Basic physics and engineering principles of image science. Emphasis on ionizing and nonionizing radiation production and interactions with the body and detectors.  Major imaging systems: radiography, computed tomography, magnetic resonance, ultrasound, and optical microscopy.  
Radiation detectors and sensors used for biomedical applications.  Emphasis on radiation interactions, detection, measurement and use of radiation sensors for imaging. Operating principles of gas, semiconductor, and scintillation detectors.
Covers MRI technology at an advanced level with emphasis on mathematical descriptions and problem solving. Topics include spin dynamics, signal generation, image reconstruction, pulse sequences, biophysical basis of T1, T2, RF, gradient coil design, signal to noise, image artifacts.
Techniques for assessing the performance of medical imaging systems. Principles of digital image formation and processing. Measurements that summarize diagnostic image quality and the performance of human observers viewing those images. Definition of ideal observer and other mathematical observers that may be used to predict performance from system design features. Obtain hands-on experience in computer vision by completing individual Matlab assignments that they select from topics in the course.
Analytic tomographic reconstruction from projections in 2D and
Current and emerging technologies to visualize biological structures and processes at size scales = 100 nanometers  and their application towards the advancement of molecular medicine.  Technologies include superresolution optical microscopy, electron microscopy and tomography.  Emphasis on quantitative imaging. 
Quantitative basis for biophotonics and bioimaging, with an emphasis on the physical and mathematical description of optics, light propagation, and light-tissue interactions. Advantages and limitations of various optical imaging and sensing technologies. Illustrative applications in diagnostics, basic research, and therapy.
Introduction to fundamental mechanisms governing the structure, function, and assembly of bio-macromolecules. Emphasis is on a quantitative understanding of the nano-to-microscale interactions between and within individual molecules, as well as of their assemblies, in particular membranes.
Informed use of an optical research microscope. Analysis of digitized images. Optical image formation and its limitations.  Laboratories on modern microscope usage and videomicroscopy techniques including optimization of recorded images and quantification of microscopic distances and displacements.
Systems biology at the biochemical level. Mathematical and computational methods emphasizing nonlinear representation, dynamics, robustness, and optimization. Case studies of signal-transduction cascades, metabolic networks and regulatory mechanisms. Focus on formulating and answering fundamental questions concerning network function, design, and evolution.
Analysis, design, and construction of gene circuits.  Modeling strategies, elements of design, and methods for studying variations in design.  Case studies involving prokaryotic gene circuits to illustrate natural selection, discovery of design principles, and construction of circuits for engineering objectives.  
Based on morphogenetic signals, responding stem cells and extracellular matrix scaffolding. Design and development of tissues for functional restoration of various organs damaged/lost due to cancer, disease and trauma. Fundamentals of morphogenetic signals, responding stem cells and extracellular matrix scaffolding.
Engineering principles to direct cell and tissue behavior and formation. Contents include controlled delivery of macromolecules, transport within and around biomaterials, examination of mechanical forces of engineered constructs, and current experimental techniques used in the field.
Basic concepts of digital signal recording and analysis; sampling; empirical modeling; Fourier analysis, random processes, spectral analysis, and correlation applied to biomedical signals.
Theoretical applications of linear systems, ordinary and partial differential equations, and probability theory and random processes that describe biological systems and instruments that measure them. Students will be introduced to numerical solution techniques in MATLAB. 
Radioactive decay, interaction of radiation with matter, radionuclide production, radiation detection, digital autoradiography, gamma camera imaging, single photon emission computed tomography, positron emission tomography and applications of these techniques in biology and medicine.
Current techniques and tools for molecular imaging. Emphasis on learning to apply principles from the physical sciences to imaging problems in medicine and biology.  
Selected topics in Cellular and Molecular Systems Engineering.
Selected topics in Biomedical Imaging. 
Selected topics in Computational Bioengineering.
Selected topics in Cell and Tissue Biomechanics.
Selected topics in Analysis of Human Movement.
Individual and/or group conference on problems, progress, and techniques in biomedical engineering research. 

Introduction to organismal diversity, using the phylogenetic tree of life as an organizing theme. Lectures and laboratories cover methods of phylogenetic reconstruction, current knowledge of the tree of life, and the evolution of life's most important and interesting innovations.  May be taught abroad.
Introduction to the essential principles underlying cellular organization and function, how the properties of cells give rise to complex cellular behaviors that contribute to tissue organization/function and the physiological paradigms that govern complex life. 
Introduction to biology at UC Davis through discussions with faculty and speakers from industry and medicine. 
The range of subjects and approaches in the field of biology, including both basic and applied research topics.
Basic laboratory skills in life sciences research, including microbiology, molecular biology, and genetics. 
Introduction to the application of quantitative methods to biological problems. Students will use a mathematical software package to tackle problems drawn from all aspects of biology.
Introduction to the application of quantitative methods to biological problems. Use a mathematical software package to tackle problems drawn from all aspects of biology.
Hands-on, project-based introduction to genome-centric biology with specific focus on quantitative elements of associated experimental approaches. Measurement error and error estimation, experimental design, data analysis, model generation and fitting, and model-guided hypothesis generation and testing. Content covered through quarter-long interactive experiment to isolate an organism, quantitatively characterize its behavior, and sequence its genome.
Hands-on, project-based introduction to modern computational and bioinformatics analyses using genome sequence data generated in BIS 023A. Genome sequence assembly and alignment, genome annotation, and genetic correlates of behavior. Additional topics may include scientific and societal implications of the availability and usage of genome information and genome manipulation, and real-life applications of genome analysis.
Introduction to linear algebra with biological, medical, and bioengineering applications. Matrix algebra, vector spaces, orthogonality, determinants, eigenvalues, eigenvectors, principal component analysis, singular value decomposition, and linear transformations. Computer labs cover mathematical and computational techniques for modeling biological systems.
Solutions of differential equations with biological, medical, and bioengineering applications. First and second order linear equations, phase plane analysis, nonlinear dynamics, Laplace transforms, and the diffusion equation. Computer labs cover mathematical and numerical techniques for modeling biological systems.

Primarily for lower division students

Nucleic acid structure and function; gene expression and its regulation; replication; transcription and translation; transmission genetics; molecular evolution. May be taught abroad.
Discussion and problem solving related to fundamental principles of classical and molecular genetics as presented in BIS 101.
Structure and function of macromolecules with emphasis on proteins, catalysis, enzyme kinetics, lipids, membranes, and proteins as machines. May be taught abroad.
Study of the quantitative concepts and mathematical models fundamental to biochemistry.
Study of the quantitative concepts and mathematical models fundamental to biochemistry.
Fundamentals of the carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur cycles in nature, including key reactions of biomolecules such as carbohydrates, amino acids, lipids, and nucleotides, and of energy production and use in different types of organisms. Principles of metabolic regulation.
Membrane receptors and signal transduction; cell trafficking; cell cycle; cell growth and division; extracellular matrix and cell-cell junctions; cell development; immune system.
Fundamentals of biochemical processes, with emphasis on protein structure and activity; energy metabolism; catabolism of sugars, amino acids, and lipids; and gluconeogenesis.   
Introduction to probability theory and stochastic processes with biological, medical, and bioengineering applications. Combinatorics, discrete and continuous random variables, Bayes formula, conditional probability, Markov chains, Poisson processes, and Brownian motion. Computer labs cover mathematical and computational modeling techniques.
Biological and physical processes affecting plant and animal populations in the rich array of habitats at the Bodega Marine Laboratory ecological preserve.  Emphasis on field experience, with complementing lectures to address population and community processes. See Bodega Marine Laboratory Program.
Training in scientific research, from hypothesis testing to publication, including methods of library research. Research will be related to a topic covered in BIS 122. Final presentation both oral and written. See Bodega Marine Laboratory Program.
Series of weekly seminars by recognized authorities in various disciplines of marine science from within and outside the UC system. Includes informal discussion with speaker. Held at Bodega Marine Laboratory; see Bodega Marine Laboratory Program. 
Independent research on topics related to an accompanying core Bodega Marine Laboratory summer course. Receive training in generating hypotheses, designing experiments, collecting and analyzing data, and scientific communication.
Dynamic modeling in the biological sciences, including matrix models, difference equations, differential equations, and complex dynamics. Examples include classic models in ecology, cell biology, physiology, and neuroscience. Emphasis on understanding models, their assumptions, and implications for modern biology.
Interdisciplinary research and training that uses mathematics and computation to solve current problems in biology. 
Applying systems theory to understand the properties of biological networks in a variety of model organisms. Emphasis on both local biological circuits, and genome-scale biological networks. Topics include network motifs, robustness, modeling, emergent properties and integration of networks.
Applying systems theory to understand the properties of biological networks in a variety of model organisms. Emphasis on both local biological circuits, and genome-scale biological networks. Topics include network motifs, robustness, modeling, emergent properties and integration of networks.
Computational approaches to model and analyze biological information about genomes, transcriptomes, and proteomes. Topics include genome assembly and annotation, mRNA and small RNA profiling, proteomics, protein-DNA and protein-protein interactions, network analysis, and comparative genomics. Computer programming experience is not required.
Comparison of genomes at the population and species level. Genomic techniques for mapping disease (and other) genes, reconstruction of evolutionary history and migration patterns, determination of gene function, prediction of organismal traits, and metagenomics: determination of community composition and function.
Overview of genomic methodologies and key biological findings obtained using genome-wide analyses. RNA profiling, small RNAs, epigenomics, chromatin immunoprecipitation, protein-DNA interactions, proteomics and network analysis.
Principles & applications of systems and synthetic biology. Bistable & monostable switches, single cell sequencing, genetic circuits, design of biological parts and pathway modeling. Computational & experimental labs use single cell sequence data to determine switch types in cell identity, design and characterize promoter libraries and use genomics-enabled approaches to discover and characterize enzymes & metabolites.

Students majoring in Biological Sciences who have completed two quarters (3-5 units per quarter) of 199 and who qualify for the honors program as defined by the current catalog. Opportunity for Biological Sciences majors to pursue intensive research culminating in the writing of a senior thesis with the guidance of faculty advisors.

Reinforcement of teaching techniques learned in 195A with additional classroom experience in K-12 science classrooms wirking with a master teacher observing, assisting with labs and activities, managing students and teaching lessons.
Assisting the instructor by tutoring students in one of the Biological Sciences' regular courses.  
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.

College of Biological Sciences staff members offer group study courses under this number.
Work experience on or off campus in subject area pertaining to biotechnology or in a business, industry or agency associated withbiotechnology. Internship supervised by faculty member in the animal or plant sciences.
Directed group study.

Concepts and programs needed to apply bioinformatics in biotechnology research. Sequence analysis and annotation and use of plant and animal databases for students in biological and agricultural sciences. 
Principles and concepts of plant biotechnology including recombinant DNA technology, molecular biology, genomics, cell and tissue culture, gene transfer and crop improvement strategies using transgenic crops.
Techniques of genetic analysis at the molecular level including recombinant DNA, gene mapping and basic computational biology. 
Advanced techniques of genetic analysis at the molecular and cellular levels, including transformation, gene expression and analysis of transgenic plants.
Real and hypothetical case studies to illustrate ethical issues in genomics and biotechnology. Training and practice in difficult ethical situations and evaluating personal and social consequences.
Preparation and review of a scientific proposal. Problem definition, identification of objectives, literature survey, hypothesis generation, design of experiments, data analysis planning, proposal outline and preparation.
Formulating experimental approaches to current questions in biotechnology; performance of proposed experiments.
Work experience on or off campus in a subject area pertaining to biotechnology or in a business, industry or agency associated with biotechnology. Internship supervised by faculty member in the animal or plant sciences.
Independent study of selected topics under the direction of a member or members of the staff. Completion will involve the writing of a senior thesis.
Directed group study.

Current Techniques in Biophysics. Topics include mathematical methods, modeling, mass spectrometry, stochastic process, scanning probe microscopy, electron microscopy, fluorescence, membrane diffusion/mechanics, and single particle tracking.   
Current Techniques in Biophysics. Topics include protein folding, membrane structure and dynamics, Raman spectroscopy, fluorescence resonance energy transfer, time resolved fluorescence, quantum dot, fluorescence imaging,esr, high resolution nmr, and in vivo nmr.
One five-week laboratory assignment in the research laboratory of a Biophysics Graduate Group faculty member. Individual research problems with emphasis on methodological/procedural experience and experimental design.
Two five-week laboratory assignments in the research laboratories of Biophysics Graduate Group faculty members. Individual research problems with emphasis on methodological/procedural experience and experimental design.
Principles and applications of magnetic resonance in biomedicine. Fundamental concepts and the biophysical basis for magnetic resonanceapplications in areas of tissue characterization/imaging, metabolic regulation, and cellular bioenergetics.
Advanced topics on membrane biochemistry and biophysics.  Relationship of the unique properties of biomembranes to their roles in cell biology and physiology.  
Current and emerging technologies to visualize biological structures and processes at size scales = 100 nanometers  and their application towards the advancement of molecular medicine.  Technologies include superresolution optical microscopy electron microscopy and tomography.  Emphasis on quantitative imaging.
Principal optical techniques used to study biological structures and their related functions. Specific optical techniques useful in the studies of protein-nucleic acid, protein-membrane and protein-protein interactions. Biomedical applications of optical techniques.
Presentation of current research by experts in biophysics.
Presentation and discussion of faculty and graduate-student research in biophysics.
Designed to help graduate students develop and maintain familiarity with the current and past literature in the field of Biophotonics and Bioimaging research and related areas.
Incomplete data; life tables; nonparametric methods; parametric methods; accelerated failure time models; proportional hazards models; partial likelihood; advanced topics.
Likelihood and linear regression; generalized linear model; Binomial regression; case-control studies; dose-response and bioassay; Poisson regression; Gamma regression; quasi-likelihood models; estimating equations; multivariate GLMs.
Standard and advanced methodology, theory, algorithms, and applications relevant for analysis of repeated measurements and longitudinal data in biostatistical and statistical settings.
Basic statistical principles of clinical designs, including bias, randomization, blocking, and masking. Practical applications of widely-used designs, including dose-finding, comparative and cluster randomization designs. Advanced statistical procedures for analysis of data collected in clinical trials.
Standard and advanced statistical methodology, theory, algorithms, and applications relevant to the analysis of -omics data.
Emerging problems in molecular biology and current machine learning-based solutions to those problem. How deep learning, kernel methods, graphical models, feature selection, non-parametric models and other techniques can be applied to application areas such as gene editing, gene network inference and analysis, chromatin state inference, cancer genomics and single cell genomics. 
Biostatistical methods and models selected from the following:  genetics, bioinformatics and genomics;longitudinal or functional data; clinical trials and experimental design; analysis of environmental data; dose-response, nutrition and toxicology; survival analysis; observational studies and epidemiology; computer-intensive or Bayesian methods in biostatistics.
Research in Biostatistics under the supervision of major professor.
Supervised work experience in cardiology.  
Special study by individual arrangement in cardiovascular medicine. Work will include directed readings, laboratory and discussions.
Fundamentals underlying cardiovascular medicine. Including hemodynamics, neural control of the circulation, biochemistry and some experimental design and statistics. Experts in each of these fields will give current information in their areas.
Research or special studies.
Emphasis placed on history taking and physical examination of pediatric and adult patients with congenital and acquired cardiovascular disease. Hospital rounds in CCU and elsewhere. Roles of ECG, PCG, and cardiac fluoroscopy, etc., in office cardiology will be evaluated.
Participation with members of subspecialty consultation service in initial clinical evaluation, work-up, management, and follow-up of patients with cardiologic disorders. Two outpatient clinics per week.
Research in laboratory and exercise testing to be determined by instructor. Current methods of clinical research involving certain aspects of diagnosis and treatment. 
Clinical experience, weekly seminar and reading on primary and secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease. Will be carried out in Lipid and Hypertension Clinics, Exercise Laboratory, Cardiac Care Unit, Cardiac Catheterization, and Cardiac Surgery services.
Students attend one or more cardiovascular medicine clinics: general, hypertension, arrhythmia. Introduction to the diagnosis/treatment of common cardiovascular problems.
Special Studies Module, a four-week course on the topic Basic Science Principles Relating to Gender Specific Medicine.
Special group study in cardiology for medical students in EKG unit. May include lectures, directed reading, and/or discussion groups.

Introduction to filmmaking concepts, principles, and methods. Emphasis on form, content and historical dialectic between classical narrative filmmaking conventions and artists' challenges to these conventions. 
Examination of the cultural context of the emergence of cinema. Discussion of cinema as a product of the age of industrialization and conquest, as well as an element of urban culture, and mass transportation. 
Supervised internship, on or off campus, in the area of cinema and digital media. 
Directed group study in cinema and digital media.
Special study for undergraduates in cinema and digital media.
Experimental approaches to the making of film and video in the age of digital technologies. Builds upon the foundation provided by CDM 020. Instruction in technical, conceptual, creative, and critical skills for taking a project from idea to fruition.
Continuation of CDM 100 with further exploration of digital cinema creation. Additional topics include new modes of distribution, streaming, installation and exhibition.
Media production as a mode of cultural criticism, furthering feminist and social justice goals. Fundamentals of camera, editing and distribution via a social engagement model. Study and hands-on response to key historic and contemporary feminist and social justice media discourses.
Use of video and new media tools to address social issues among neighborhood and community groups. Use basic video, sound, and lighting techniques while working with local groups in a group video project. 
Techniques of recording, editing, mixing, and synthesis to combine voice, field recordings, and electronic signals. Incorporating live, recorded, found sounds to create multidimensional stories. Presentation of live performances, etc.
Culmination of CDM sound courses. Focuses on performance and improvisation, culminating in a final public performance. Expectation of extensive reading and rehearsal outside of class time.
The art of character animation in three dimensional computer animation. Movement theory, principles of animation, animation timing. Development of technical and practical skills.
Introduction to object-oriented programming for artists. Focus on understanding the metaphors and potential of object-oriented programming for sound, video, performance, and interactive installations.
Social, political, economic, and aesthetic factors in virtual reality. Artificial environments, telepresence, and simulated experience. Focus on contemporary artists' work and writing.
Special topics in cinema & digital media.
Supervised internship, on or off campus, in the area of cinema and digital media.
Leading small voluntary discussion groups affiliated with departmental courses under the supervision of the course instructor.
Directed group study in cinema and digital media. For students with upper division standing. May be taught abroad.
Special study in cinema and digital media. For advanced undergraduates with upper division standing.
Teaching assistant training practicum.
Directed group study in cognitive science.
Special study for lower division students.
Theoretical and empirical approaches to neuroeconomics (neuroscience of decision making) from psychology, neuroscience, economics, and computer science. Neuroscience of judgment and decision making, behavioral economics, and reinforcement learning.
Current theoretical and empirical evidence in the study of cognition and consciousness. Theories of consciousness, psychological and neural basis of conscious and unconscious processes such as attention, intentionality, and dreams.
Supervised internship off and on campus, in community and institutional settings. 
Directed research. Supervised reading, research and writing leading to submission of a Senior Honors thesis under the direction of faculty sponsor.
Directed research. Supervised reading, research and writing leading to submission of a Senior Honors thesis under the direction of faculty sponsor.
Directed group study in cognitive science.
Special study for advanced undergraduates.
Detailed study of the gross anatomical structure of the human body, with emphasis on function and clinical relevance to students entering health care professions.
Detailed study of prosected human cadavers in small group format with extensive hands-on experience.
Complements Gross Anatomy by extending the study of structure to the microscopic level. Shows how cells are assembled into tissues, and tissues into organs, with an emphasis on demonstrating how microscopic structure explains function.
Clinically relevant anatomy of the normal human nervous system, including external and internal anatomy of the brain, spinal cord, and cranial nerves. Blood supply to the brain and spinal cord. Functional neuroanatomy of motor, sensory, and cognitive systems. Application of neuroanatomical principles relevant to clinical problem solving for students entering health care professions.
Experience of supervised internship in research laboratories of members of the department.
Provides laboratory instruction in gross and microscopic human anatomy, with small groups of undergraduates under the supervision of the instructor.
Directed reading, discussion, and/or laboratory experience on selected topics.

Lectures on human gross anatomy and cadaver dissection laboratory. Topics arranged by region; emphasis on osteology, neuromuscular anatomy, cardiovascular anatomy, gastrointestinal anatomy and anatomy of reproductive systems.
Physiology and anatomy of the normal human nervous system in an integrated format.  

Discussion of problems, progress and literature groups relevant to current research undertaken by laboratory groups Human Anatomy.


Integrated presentation of developmental, gross and radiologic anatomy. Embryology and radiology correlated with the dissection of the entire body. Embryology from implantation to birth.
Microscopic structure of the basic cells, tissues and organs of the body with an emphasis on how structure explains function. Analysis and identification of sectioned material at the light microscopic and ultrastructural levels.
Anatomy of the normal human nervous system, to include gross external and internal morphology of brain and spinal cord, and function neuroanatomy of motor, sensory and cognitive systems. Incorporates application of neuroanatomy to clinical problem solving. 
Attend all of the lectures and laboratory sessions for CHA 400 and CHA 402 during the four-week section; approximately seven anatomy labs and three-four histology labs. Tutor first-year students during the laboratory sessions. Prepare and present a clinical correlate session.
Assist instructor by tutoring medical students in preparation for one of the departmental courses that is a component of the required curriculum for the School of Medicine.
Directed reading and group discussions and/or laboratory experience on selected topics.

Periodic table, stoichiometry, chemical equations, physical properties and kinetic theory of gases, atomic and molecular structure and chemical bonding. Laboratory experiments in stoichiometric relations, properties and collection of gases, atomic spectroscopy, and introductory quantitative analysis. 
Limited enrollment course with a more rigorous treatment of material covered in CHE 002A. Students completing CHE 002AH can continue with CHE 002BH or CHE 002B.
Continuation of CHE 002A. Condensed phases and intermolecular forces, chemical thermodynamics, chemical equilibria, acids and bases, solubility. Laboratory experiments in thermochemistry, equilibria, and quantitative analysis using volumetric methods.
Limited enrollment course with a more rigorous treatment of material covered in CHE 002B. Students completing CHE 002BH can continue with CHE 002CH or CHE 002C.
Continuation of CHE 002B. Kinetics, electrochemistry, spectroscopy, structure and bonding in transition metal compounds, application of principles to chemical reactions. Laboratory experiments in selected analytical methods and syntheses.
Limited enrollment course with a more rigorous treatment of material covered in CHE 002C.
Integrated General and Organic Chemistry intended for majors in the life sciences. Core concepts of chemical composition, structure and properties. Includes phase changes, separation methods, composition, spectroscopy, atomic and molecular structure, periodicity, bonding, charge distribution, intermolecular forces, and physical properties.
Continuation of CHE 003A covering core concepts of characterization of chemical processes and predicting chemical changes. Includes modeling chemical reactions, understanding proportions/stoichiometry, tracking energy, activation energy, reaction kinetics, thermodynamics, and equilibrium.
Continuation of CHE 003B covering core concepts of harnessing energy, controlling reaction extent, and organic chemistry synthetic pathways. Includes acids and bases, thermodynamics, chemical equilibria, organic chemistry terminology and mechanisms.
With CHE 008B, an introduction to the nomenclature, structure, chemistry, and reaction mechanisms of organic compounds. Intended for students majoring in areas other than organic chemistry.
Laboratory concerned primarily with organic laboratory techniques and the chemistry of the common classes of organic compounds. Lecture portion a continuation of CHE 008A.
Primarily for lower division students.
Special study for undergraduates.May be taught abroad.
Practical aspects of water chemistry in the environment, including thermodynamic relations, coordination chemistry, solubility calculations, redox reactions and rate laws. Computer modeling of the evolution in water chemistry from contact with minerals and gases.
Continuation of PHE 003C. Core concepts of organic structure, nomenclature, functional groups, organic acids and bases, resonance and delocalization, aromaticity, intermolecular forces, three-dimensional structure and conformational analysis, spectroscopy.
Continuation of CHE 103A. Core concepts of functional group transformations, synthesis, mechanisms, sustainable chemistry, structure and function of biomolecules, organic reactions in biological systems, molecular design, detection, separation, and identification of organic molecules.
Theory and application of standard methods of chemical analysis to evidentiary samples. Use and evaluation of results from screening tests, FTIR, GC and GCMS to various sample types encountered in forensics.
Fundamental theory and laboratory techniques in; analytical and physical chemistry, errors and data analysis methods, basic electrical circuits in instruments, advanced solution equilibria, potentiometric analysis, chromatographic separations, UV-visible spectroscopy, lasers.
Physical chemistry intended for majors in the life science area. Introductory development of classical and statistical thermodynamics including equilibrium processes and solutions of both non-electrolytes and electrolytes. The thermodynamic basis of electrochemistry and membrane potentials.
Continuation of CHE 107A. Kinetic theory of gases and transport processes in liquids. Chemical kinetics, enzyme kinetics and theories of reaction rates. Introduction to quantum theory, atomic and molecular structure, and spectroscopy. Application to problems in the biological sciences.
Chemical principles and experimental methods applied to the biological sciences to understand the molecular structure and function of proteins, nucleic acids, carbohydrates, and membrane lipids. 
Introduction to the postulates and general principles of quantum mechanics. Approximations based on variational method and time independent perturbation theory. Application to harmonic oscillator, rigid rotor, one-electron and many-electron atoms, and homo-and hetero-nuclear diatomic molecules.
Group theory. Application of quantum mechanics to polyatomic molecules and molecular spectroscopy. Intermolecular forces and the gas, liquid and solid states. Distributions, ensembles and partition functions. Transport properties.
Development and application of the general principles of thermodynamics and statistical thermodynamics. Chemical kinetics, rate laws for chemical reactions and reaction mechanisms.
Intermediate theory and laboratory techniques in analytical and physical chemistry. Advanced data analysis methods and goodness-of-fit criteria.  Fourier-transform spectroscopic methods and instrumentation. Mass spectrometry. Electrochemistry. Liquid chromatography.  
The 118A-C series is for students planning professional school studies in health and life sciences. Rigorous, in-depth presentation of basic principles with emphasis on stereochemistry and spectroscopy and preparations and reactions of nonaromatic hydrocarbons, haloalkanes, alcohols and ethers.
Continuation of CHE 118A, with emphasis on spectroscopy and the preparation and reactions of aromatic hydrocarbons, organometallic compounds, aldehydes and ketones.
Continuation of CHE 118B, with emphasis on the preparation, reactions and identification of carboxylic acids and their derivatives, alkyl and acyl amines, -dicarbonyl compounds, and various classes of naturally occurring, biologically important compounds.
Modern theoretical and experimental methods used to study problems of molecular structure and bonding; emphasis on spectroscopic techniques.
Chemical and physical aspects of inorganic nanoparticles. Topics include synthesis, structure, colloidal behavior, catalytic activity, size and shape dependency of physical properties, analytical methods and applications. 
Symmetry, molecular geometry and structure, molecular orbital theory of bonding (polyatomic molecules and transition metals), solid state chemistry, energetics and spectroscopy of inorganic compounds.
Synthesis, structure and reactivity of inorganic and heteroorganicmolecules containing the main group elements.
Synthesis, structure and reactivity of transition metal complexes, organometallic and bioinorganic chemistry, the lanthanides and actinides.
The preparation, purification and characterization of main group andtransition metal inorganic and organometallic compounds.
Advanced theory and laboratory techniques in analytical and physical chemistry. Advanced spectroscopic methods. Thermodynamics. Kinetics.Chemical literature. Digital electronics and computer interfacing. Laboratory measurements and vacuum techniques.
Introduction to the basic concepts of organic chemistry with emphasis on stereochemistry and the chemistry of hydrocarbons. Designed primarily for majors in chemistry. Chemistry majors should enroll in CHE 129A concurrently. May be taught abroad.
Continuation of CHE 128A with emphasis on the chemistry of alcohols, ethers, their sulfur analogs, and carbonyl compounds. Introduction to the application of spectroscopic methods to organic chemistry. Introduction to synthesis of moderately complex organic molecules. May be taught abroad.
Continuation of CHE 128B with emphasis on enolate condensations and the chemistry of amines, phenols, and sugars; selected biologically important compounds. May be taught abroad.
Introduction to laboratory techniques of organic chemistry. Emphasis on methods used for separation and purification of organic compounds. May be taught abroad.
Continuation of CHE 129A. Emphasis on methods used for synthesis and isolation of organic compounds.
continuation of PHE 129B.
Examination of the design principles and experimental methods used in pharmaceutical and medicinal chemistry. May be taught abroad.
Continuation of CHE 130A with emphasis on case studies of various drugs and the use of computational methods in drug design. May be taught abroad.
Seminar. Exploration of medicinal and pharmaceutical chemistry topics through seminars presented by professional chemists (and allied professionals). Designed to highlight career opportunities for students with a degree in pharmaceutical chemistry. 
Introduction to modern synthetic methodology in organic chemistry with emphasis on retrosynthetic analysis, reaction mechanisms, and application to multistep syntheses of pharmaceuticals and natural products.
Separation, purification, identification and biological evaluation of organic compounds using modern methods of synthesis, computational chemistry and instrumentation. Emphasis on pharmaceutical and medicinal substances.
Preparation for work in GQP laboratories in both research and industry.  Context within GQP-Good Quality Practices (GMP Good Manufacturing Practice, GCP Good Clinical Practices). Lab practice in GQP skills.
Chemistry of terpenes, steroids, acetogenins, and alkaloids: isolation, structure determination, biosynthesis, chemical transformations, and total synthesis. May be taught abroad.
Chemical applications of computer programming with Python. Numpy, Scipy, Matplotlib libraries. Multidimensional arrays, data visualization, linear algebra routines. Force fields and molecular dynamics simulations. Numerical integration of differential equations with applications to chemical kinetics. Least squares fitting of experimental data. 
Supervised internship in chemistry; requires a final written report.
Original research under the guidance of a faculty advisor, culminating in the writing of an extensive report.
Original research under the guidance of a faculty advisor, culminating in the writing of an extensive report.
Original research under the guidance of a faculty advisor, culminating in the writing of an extensive report.
Designed to give Chemistry undergraduate students an in-depth appreciation of career opportunities with a bachelors degree in chemistry. Professional chemists (and allied professionals) describe research and provide career insights.
Participation may include development of laboratory experiments, lecture demonstrations, autotutorial modules or assistance with laboratory sessions.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.
Special study for advanced undergraduates. May be taught abroad.
Symmetry elements and operations, point groups, representations of groups. Applications to molecular orbital theory, ligand field theory, molecular vibrations, and angular momentum. Crystallographic symmetry.
Introduction to mathematical and numerical methods in chemistry. Real and complex functions.  Methods of integration. Differential equations. Linear algebra and matrices. Special functions. Integral transforms. Statistics.
Vibrational and rotational spectra; electronic spectra and photoelectron spectroscopy; magnetism; electron spin and nuclear quadrapole resonance spectroscopy; nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy; other spectroscopic methods.
Advanced topics in physical chemistry, biophysical chemistry or chemical physics chosen from areas of current research interest.  
Stationary-state quantum chemistry: postulates of quantum mechanics, simple solutions, central field problems and angular momenta, hydrogen atom, perturbation theory, variational theory, atoms and molecules.
Matrix mechanics and time-dependent quantum chemistry: matrix formulation of quantum mechanics, Heisenberg representation, time-dependent perturbation theory, selection rules, density matrices, and miscellaneous molecular properties.
Molecular spectroscopy: Born-Oppenheimer approximation, rotational, vibrational and electronic spectroscopy, spin systems, and molecular photophysics.
Principles and applications of statistical mechanics; ensemble theory; statistical thermodynamics of gases, solids, liquids, electrolyte solutions and polymers; chemical equilibrium.
Statistical mechanics of nonequilibrium systems, including the rigorous kinetic theory of gases, continuum mechanics transport in dense fluids, stochastic processes, brownian motion and linear response theory.
Introduction to modern concepts in chemical reaction dynamics for graduate students in chemistry. Emphasis will be placed on experimental techniques as well as emerging physical models for characterizing chemical reactivity at a microscopic level.
Mathematics of wide utility in chemistry, computational methods for guidance or alternative to experiment, and modern formulations of chemical theory. Emphasis will vary in successive years.
Quantum mechanics of spin and orbital angular momentum, nuclear magnetic resonance, theory of chemical shift and multiplet structures, electron spin resonance, theory of gtensor in organic and transition ions, spin Hamiltonians, nuclear quadrupolar resonance, spin relaxation processes.
Introduction to x-ray structure determination; crystals, symmetry, diffraction geometry, sample preparation and handling, diffraction apparatus and data collection, methods of structure solution and refinement, presentation of results, text, tables and graphics,crystallographic literature.
Relationship of higher order macromolecular structure to subunit composition; equilibrium properties and macromolecular dynamics; physical chemical determination of macromolecular structure.
Identification of organic compounds and investigation of stereochemical and reaction mechanism phenomena using spectroscopic methods--principally NMR, IR and MS.
Practical application of NMR, IR and MS techniques for organic molecules.
Chemical and physical aspects of inorganic nanoparticles, including synthesis, purification, reactivity, characterization, and applications for technology. Emphasis is on problems from the current literature. 	
Electronic structures, bonding, and reactivity of transition metal compounds.
Defines role of inorganic chemistry in the functioning of biological systems by identifying the functions of metal ions and main group compounds in biological systems and discussing the chemistry of model and isolated biological compounds. Offered every third year. 
Synthesis, physical properties, reactions and bonding of main group compounds. Discussions of concepts of electron deficiency, hypervalency,and non-classical bonding. Chemistry of the main group elements will be treated systematically. Offered every third year. 
Design and synthesis, structure and bonding of solid-state compounds; physical properties and characterization of solids; topics of current interest such as low-dimensional materials, inorganic polymers, materials for catalysis. Offered every third year. 
Overview of homogeneous catalysis and related methods, with emphasis on kinetics, mechanisms, and applications for organic synthesis.  The related methods may include cluster, colloid, phase transfer, enzymatic, heterogeneous and polymer-supported catalysis. Offered every third year. 
Covers the basic principles and concepts of magnetism, methods used for characterization of magnetic properties, as well as specific state-of-the-art magnetic materials and topics from the recent chemistry literature.
Current strategies and methods in synthetic organic chemistry. Focus on construction of carbon frameworks, control of relative and absolute stereochemistry and retrosynthetic strategies. Use of databases and molecular modeling software in multistep strategies.  
Current strategies and methods in synthetic organic chemistry. Continuation of CHE 231A. Organic synthesis of complex target molecules. Stereochemical considerations and asymmetric synthesis. Organometallics for selective transformations. Carbocyclic and heterocyclic ring formation.
Introduction to elementary concepts in physicalorganic chemistry including the application of simple numerical techniques in characterizing and modeling organic reactions.
Current trends in use of organometallics for organic synthesis; preparations, properties, applications, and limitations of organometallic reagents derived from transition and/or main group metals.
Advanced treatment of chemistry of naturally occurring compounds isolated from a variety of sources. Topics will include isolation, structure determination, chemical transformations, total synthesis,biological activity, and biosynthesis. Biosynthetic origin will be used as a unifying theme.
Structure and function of biomolecules; molecular recognition; enzyme reaction mechanisms; design of suicide substrates for enzymes; enzyme engineering; design of artificial enzymes and application of enzymes in organic synthesis.
Synthesis of complex molecules in nature. Use of biosynthetic pathways in synthesis of new chemical entities. Applications of small molecules in chemical genetics and structural biology. Solving biological problems using synthetic biomolecules.
Numerical treatment of experimental data; thermodynamics of electrolyte and non-electrolyte solutions; complex equilibria in aqueous and non-aqueous solutions; potentiometry and specific ion electrodes; mass transfer in liquid solutions; fundamentals of separation science, including column, gas and liquid chromatography.
Concepts of surfaces and interfaces: physical properties, unique chemistry and electronic effects.  Focus on gas-solid interfaces, with some discussion of liquid-solid interfaces.
Concepts and mechanisms of light-matter interactions. Chemical applications of modern spectroscopic methods, including multiphoton spectroscopy, time-resolved laser and x-ray photolysis, and phase-contrast x-ray imaging.
Mass spectrometry and related methods with emphasis on ionization methods, mass analyzers, and detectors.  Related methods may include ion-molecule reactions, unimolecular dissociation of organic and bio-organic compounds, and applications in biological and environmental analysis. 
Electroanalytical chemistry with consideration of mass transfer and electrode kinetics for polarizable electrodes.  Current-potential curves for a variety of conditions, including both potentiostatic and galvanostatic control, and their application in chemical analysis.
Introduction to modern microscopy and imaging techniques: scanning tunneling, atomic force, far-field optical, fluorescence, scanning near-field optical, and scanning electron microscopy. Application to nanoscience and analytical and bioanalytical chemistry. Some laboratory demonstrations.
Designed to help chemistry graduate students develop and maintain familiarity with the current and past literature in their immediate field of research and related areas.
Introduction to identification, formulation, and solution of meaningfulscientific problems including experimental design and/or theoretical analyses of new and prevailing techniques, theories and hypotheses. May be repeated for credit when topic differs.
Applications of the methodology developed in CHE 263 to experimental and theoretical studies. Advanced methods of interpretation of results are developed. Includes the preparation of manuscripts for publication.

Introduces first- and second-year Chemistry graduate students to the process of giving an effective research presentation. Advanced Ph.D. students give formal seminars describing the design and execution of their research projects.
Designed to give Chemistry graduate students an in-depth appreciation of career opportunities with a M.S. or Ph.D. degree in chemistry.  Professional chemists (and allied professionals) give seminars describing both research and career insights.
Laboratory provides qualified graduate students with the opportunity to pursue original investigation in Pharmaceutical Chemistry and allied fields in order to fulfill the letter-graded research requirement of the Integrated B.S./M.S. Program in Chemistry (Pharmaceutical Chemistry Emphasis).
Practical experience in methods and problems of teaching chemistry. Includes analyses of texts and supporting material, discussion of teaching techniques, preparing for and conducting of discussion sessions and student laboratories. Participation in the teaching program required for Ph.D. in chemistry.
Advanced topics in teaching chemistry. Analysis and discussion of curricular design, curricula materials, teaching methods and evaluation. For students who are planning a career in teaching chemistry.
Overview of health issues of Chicanas/os and Latinas/os in the State of California; role of poverty/lack of education in limited access to health care.
Overview of health issues of Chicanas/os and Latinas/os in the State of California; role of poverty/lack of education and limited access to health care. All course instruction in Spanish. May be taught abroad.
Introduction to the epidemiology of the leading causes of death for ethnic/racial minorities. Assessment of disproportionate rates at which ethnic/racial minorities suffer and die from chronic and infectious diseases and injuries and statistical methods used to calculate these rates.
Introduction to epidemiology of leading causes of death for ethnic/racial minorities. Assessment of disproportionate rates at which ethnic/racial minorities suffer & die from chronic and infectious diseases & injuries & statistical methods used to calculate these rates. May be taught abroad.
Academic guidance combined with internship in community agencies serving Mexican/Latina/Latino/Chicana/Chicano clients. Students will use their bilingual skills and knowledge of history, culture, economics, politics and social issues. 
Critical examination of emerging Chicana/o Studies theoretical perspectives in light of contemporary intellectual frameworks in the social sciences, arts, and humanities. Includes analysis of practices of self-representation, and socio-cultural developments in the Chicana/o community.
The Chicana/o experience in the American society and economy viewed from theoretical perspectives. Immigration, history of integration of Chicana/o labor into American class structure, education inequality, ethnicity, the family and Chicana/o politics. (Former course SOC 110.)
Analysis of the role and status of Chicanas/Mexicanas in contemporary society. Special emphasis on their historical role, the political, economic and social institutions that have affected their status, and their contributions to society and their community. (Former CHI 102.)
Chicana/o and Latina/o migration experiences within a global context. Topics include national and/or transnational migration in Mexico, Central America, and the United States.
Introduction to the field of Chicana/o psychology. Analysis of socio-cultural context of Chicanas/os and Latinas/os. Special attention to issues of ethnic identity development, bilingualism, and development of self esteem. Impact of minority experience, migration, acculturation are examined.
Mental health needs, problems, and service utilization patterns of Chicanas/os and Latinas/os will be analyzed. An analysis of social service policy, and the economic context of mental health programs.
Role of migration and acculturation on family structure and functioning. From a psychological and Chicana/o Studies perspective, contemporary gender roles and variations in family structures are examined. Special topics include family violence, addiction, family resilience and coping strategies.
Psychological and educational development of Chicano/Latino children and adolescents, with particular attention to the formation of ethnic, gender, class, race, and sexual identities.  
Impact of globalization on Latino families in the American continent. Relationships of political structure, economics and family. Intimate partner violence, child maltreatment and alcohol/drug abuse in contemporary Latino families. Offered in a Spanish speaking country; may be taught abroad.
Theories of U.S.-Mexican border relations, with an overview of the political, economic, and social relationships and an in-depthanalysis of immigration issues, border industrialization, women's organizations, economic crises, and legal issues.
Historical and political analysis of Chicana/Latina political involvement and activities in the general political system, women's movement, Chicano movement, and Chicana movement. Examines the public policy process and the relationship of Chicanas/Latinas to public policy formation.
Historical and contemporary study of political and economic forces which define and influence the development of Chicana/o communities. Includes critiques of traditional and Marxian theories and concepts applicable to Chicana/o communities, case studies of Chicana/o communities,especially in California and Texas.
Intensive reading, discussion and research on selected topics from Latin America and the U.S. with regard to immigrant and native communities. Topics include comparative immigration and macroeconomic policies in the U.S. and Latin America. Offered in a Spanish speaking country; may be taught abroad.
Focuses on measuring Latino/Chicano health outcomes using a quantitative approach. Assesses main types of study designs and addresses measurement of disease frequency and health effects.
Examination of  health status and intervention strategies presented in public health care settings, private clinics and by indigenous healers in Mexico. Analysis of impact of high risk diseases. Offered in a Spanish speaking country under supervision of UC Davis faculty/lecturer; may be taught abroad.
Introduction to the forms and themes of the Chicana/o novel with special attention to the construction of gender, nationality, sexuality, social class, and the family by contemporary Chicana/o novelists. Bilingual readings, lectures, discussions, and writing in Spanish.(Former course SPA 126A.)
Examination of the formal and thematic dimensions of Chicana/o theater in the contemporary period with special emphasis on El Teatro Campesino and Chicana Feminist Theater. Bilingual readings, lectures, discussions, and writing in Spanish. (Former course SPA 126B.)
Survey of Chicana/o poetry with special emphasis on its thematic and formal dimensions. Bilingual readings, lectures, discussions, and writing in Spanish. (Former course SPA 126C.)
Survey of the role Mexican cinema plays in consolidation and contestation of post-revoluationary Mexican state and in the formation of a Greater Mexican cultural identity including Chicana/o identity. Showcases genres, perios, auteurs, movements and emphasis on gendered and sexualized narratives.
The portrayal of Chicanas, Latinas and Mexicanas in commercial media. The relation between the representation of Chicana, Latina, and Mexicana women in commercial television and cinema and the role of women in Mexican and U.S. societies.
The Mural: a collective art process that empowers students and people through design and execution of mural paintings in the tradition of the Mexican Mural Movement; introduces materials and techniques.
The poster as a voice art form used by Chicanas/os and other people of color to point to the defects of social and political existence and the possibility for change, from the Chicana/o artists' perspective.
Overview of key elements for grant writing. Topics include community needs assessments, development of human subjects protocols, data collection, methods, evaluation designs and community based methodologies for grant development applications in the Latino community.
Historical issues in the lives of Chicanas and Latinas in the U.S. and their diverse countries of origin.
Individual and institutinal respnses to "troublesome" youth of color through history and in contemporary siciety. Emphasis on how race, as well as ethnicity, class, and gender have informed the treatment of "delinquent" youth.
Academic guidance combined with internship in community agencies serving Mexican/Latina/Latino/Chicana/Chicano clients. Use of bilingual skills and knowledge of history, culture, economics, politics and social issues. Internship project required. 
Internship. May be taught abroad.
Student is required to read, research, and write Honors Thesis on Chicana/o Studies topics.
Student is required to read, research, and write Honors Thesis on Chicana/o Studies topics. 
Student is required to read, research, and write Honors Thesis on Chicana/o Studies topics.

Directed group study. May be taught abroad.

Special study for advanced undergraduates. May be taught abroad.
Examination of Chicano/Latino political experiences. Evaluate theories, ideology, and practice of Chicano politics. Brief history of Chicano/Latino/Hispanic political activity, comparisons among political modes, gendered politics, and understanding relationships among Chicano, Mexican, American and world politics.



Developing elementary level skills of listening, speaking, reading and writing in Mandarin Chinese in everyday communication settings. Introduction of fundamentals of pronunciation, grammar, and Chinese characters will be introduced.
Introduction and practice in contexts of pronunciation, writing system, basic grammar and vocabulary as basis of communicative competency in Mandarin Chinese within a special nine-week intensive course which combines CHN 001, CHN 002 and CHN 003.
Trainings on all the communicative skills of listening, speaking, reading, and writing for students who already have elementary level ability to understand or speak Mandarin Chinese. Emphases on standard Mandarin pronunciation, Chinese characters, and discourse level conversations.
Training in spoken Mandarin, particularly in the phonetic transcription system known as pinyin, for students who already read and write Chinese. 
Continuation of elementary level skill development in listening, speaking, reading and writing Mandarin Chinese in everyday communication settings.  Continued introduction of basic vocabulary and characters as well as core grammar, and further train pronunciation.
Further trainings on all the communicative skills of listening, speaking, reading, and writing for students that already have elementary level ability to understand or speak Mandarin Chinese. Emphases on standard Mandarin pronunciation, Chinese characters, and discourse level conversations.
Continuation of CHN 001CN. Training in spoken Mandarin for students who can already read and write Chinese. 
Continuation of elementary level skill development in listening, speaking, reading and writing Mandarin Chinese in everyday communication settings.  Continued introduction of basic vocabulary and characters as well as core grammar, and further train pronunciation.
Continuation of CHN 002BL with further trainings on all the communicative skills of listening, speaking, reading, and writing with emphases on standard Mandarin pronunciation, Chinese characters, and discourse level conversations in more communication settings.
Continuation of CHN 002CN. Prepares students for entering upper division courses in Chinese.
Continuation of intermediate-level communication skills in spoken and written Mandarin, based on language skills developed in CHN 003.
Special nine-week accelerated, intensive summer session course that combines the work of CHN 004, CHN 005, and CHN 006. Intermediate-level training in spoken and written Chinese in cultural and communicative contexts, based on language skills developed in CHN 003 or CHN 001A.
Training continues at intermediate-level in spoken and written Chinese in cultural contexts, based on language skills developed in CHN 004.
Intermediate-level training in spoken and written Chinese in cultural contexts, based on language skills developed in CHN 005.
Introduction to business culture of China. Basic conversation and Romanization of Chinese words.


English-language survey of key Daoist texts and scholarship. Topics include Daoist concepts of the cosmos, the natural world, scripture, the body, and immortality; Daoist divinities; Daoism and the state.
Building on Chinese 006/003BL, further development of communication skills in Modern Standard Mandarin-speaking environments. Reading of dialogues/articles pertaining to contemporary China.
Nine-week intensive summer course combines CHN 111, CHN 112, and CHN 113. Training at intermediate-high and advanced-low level in spoken and written Chinese in cultural and communicative contexts based on language skills developed in CHN 006. 
Further development of communication skills from CHN 111 in Modern Standard Mandarin-speaking environments. Reading dialogues/articles pertaining to contemporary China issues and discussing ethical, moral, aesthetic, social, and cultural concerns.
Continuation of CHN 112, further developing communication skills in Modern Standard Mandarin-speaking environments. Read dialogues/articles pertaining to contemporary China issues and discuss ethical, moral, aesthetic, social, and cultural concerns. Study strategies for moving between simplified and traditional Chinese characters.
Introduction to the language in which, until the 20th century, most official, documentary, scholarly, and belle-lettristic Chinese literature was written.  
Continuation of enhancing classical Chinese reading skills with literature ranging from the prose found in Han dynasty historical works, Six Dynasties anecdotal literature, and Tang occasional texts, as well as the poetic shi and fu genres.
Translations of extended readings in the original sources and brief analyses of syntax. These sources will include texts written by well-known figures from the 8th through 15th centuries, composing in a wide variety of genres.
Evaluation of readings from various genres (literature, newspapers, TV and movies, etc.) develop advanced reading, writing, aural comprehension, and formal/professional speech skills in Mandarin Chinese. Chinese society/cultural studies, especially those sociocultural issues reflected in the language used in learning materials.
Examination of representative works of traditional Chinese fiction popular from the 12th Century until the 17th and 18th centuries. Translations in English of the Chinese texts will be available to students as reference.
Traditional Chinese poetry from its beginnings to the golden ages of Tang and Song, surveying forms and poets that best reveal the Chinese poetic sensibility and the genius of the language of Chinese poetry.
Chinese poetry from the Literary Revolution of 1917 to the present, surveying works that embody exciting innovations and reflect the modernity of 20th-century Chinese society and culture.
Literary works and scholarly essays on selected topics of Chinese prose and drama, development of a deep understanding of Chinese culture and society through sophisticated reading materials of these two important genres of the modern period. Conducted in Chinese.
Chinese film and scholarly essays on Chinese cinema and film history. Develop a deep understanding of Chinese culture and society through viewing and studying Chinese films in the Chinese language.
Study and philological analysis of selected texts from the first millennium of Imperial China.
Examination of literary works and scholarly essays on selected topics of Chinese culture and society. Development of a deep understanding of Chinese culture and society through sophisticated Chinese speaking and writing exercises.
Introduction to structural features of Chinese (Mandarin) sounds, lexicon, grammar, and writing (characters), as well as relevant dialectal and sociolinguistic issues of the language. 
Work experience in the Chinese language, with analytical term paper on a topic approved by instructor.
Guided research, under the direction of a faculty member, leading to a senior honors thesis on a topic in Chinese literature, civilization, or language studies.
Leading of small voluntary discussion groups affiliated with one of the Department's regular courses.


Directed independent study on a topic culminating in a term paper. Independent studies may only be arranged with consent of the instructor and when graduate seminars are unavailable.

Any course taught by a graduate student under the direction of the Director.

Topics may be ordered by time or place (e.g. Hellenistic Egypt) or by theme or genre (e.g. slavery in the ancient world).
Topics may be ordered by time or place (e.g. the world of Homer) or by theme or genre (e.g. the Greek art of war).
Topics may be ordered by time or place (e.g. Julius Caesar and his age) or by theme or genre (e.g. gladiators: blood in the arena).
Topics in classical reception from late antiquity to the present. Topics may be ordered by time or place (e.g. the classical tradition in Washington, D.C.) or by theme or genre (e.g. cinematic representations of the ancient world).
Topics may be ordered by discipline (e.g. ancient medicine), historical figure (e.g. Galen) or topic (e.g. science and the economy). 
Classical World as portrayed in films. Viewings and discussions of modern versions of ancient dramas, modern dramas set in the Ancient Mediterranean world, and films imbued with classical themes and allusions. Supplementary readings in ancient literature and mythology.
Thematically focused study of mythological narratives. Emphasis on the historical development of myths and the variety of theoretical approaches for the study of myth. 
Issues in the development of rhetoric from its origins in ancient Greece to A.D.430. Special attention  to works of Plato, Aristotle, Cicero, and Quintilian. Role of grammar and rhetoric in schools of Roman Empire. The Christian rhetoric of Saint Augustine.
Survey of Greek and Roman historical writing in English translation. Authors to be read may include Herodotus, Thucydides, Sallust, Livy, and Tacitus. Focus on the development of historical writing as a literary genre. 
Survey of Roman thinking about politics, as expressed both in formal theorizing and in a variety of other contexts, including oratory, historiography, and epic. Study of Roman political reflection in its historical, cultural, and literary context.
Reading of the classical epics of Homer (Iliad, Odyssey) and Virgil (Aeneid) in English. Discussion of techniques of composition, the beliefs and values of their respective societies, and the generic tradition of ancient epic.
Readings in Aristophanes, Menander, Plautus, and Terence; lectures on the development of ancient comedy.
Examination of the ancient Greek romances and their development into the grotesque realism of Petronius' Satyricon, and the religious mysticism of Apuleius' The Golden Ass.
Reading in English of selected plays of Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides. Discussion of the development and influence of Athenian tragedy.
Study of the major sources of our knowledge of Socrates, assessment of his role in the politics and culture of ancient Athens, his method of teaching, and his place in Western thought.
Archaeological monuments of the ancient Near East, including Egypt and Mesopotamia, and of Greece and Crete during the Bronze Age. Special emphasis on the problems of state formation and on the co-existence and collapse of Bronze Age societies.
Cults, festivals, and rituals of Greek religious practice and their relationship to Greek social and political institutions, and to Greek private life. Includes discussion of major sanctuaries at Olympia, Delphi, Athens, and others.
Advanced interdisciplinary study of a problem in the ancient Mediterranean world using the techniques of history, archaeology, art history and philology.
Directed reading, research and writing culminating in the completion of a senior honors thesis under the direction of faculty advisor.
Directed reading, research, and writing culminating in the completion of a senior honors thesis under the direction of faculty advisor.
Supervised instruction of Greek or Latin in nearby schools by qualified students in department.


Survey of major areas of classical scholarship, with special emphasis on the continuing impact of Mediterranean antiquity on later literature, history, art, and culture.
Research project on major area of Classical scholarship, with special emphasis on the continuing impact of Mediterranean antiquity on later literature, history, art, and culture.


Introduction to the CRGG program and overview of major clinical research topics. Overview of basic clinical skills needed to accomplish CRGG mentored research project.
Practical skills and strategies to create successful grant proposals in NIH style/format. Generating ideas, identifying and accessing research resources, grant components, specific aims, background and significance, preliminary studies, budgets, and bios. Matriculation through UC system, and resubmissions. (Former MDS 461CR.)
Anatomy and physiology of conducting clinical epidemiologic research. Familiarity with three basic study designs: cross-sectional, case-control, and cohort. Discussion of principles of measurements in clinical epidemiological studies, basic methods for analyzing data, and ethical issues involved in conducting research.
Overview of major approaches to clinical research, including health services research techniques, informatics, GCRC, and preclinical methodologies to enhance clinical projects. Overview of UC Davis clinical research support infrastructure. Methodologies applicable to clinical research and its multi-disciplinary perspective.
Acquire information about ethical responsibilities; Explore major questions in ethics; Apply ethical principles, concepts and values; Gain an appreciation of the role of trust in scientific research. Recommend three quarters of CLH204. Must enroll in Fall to continue through Spring.
Todays scientific challenges necessitate cross-disciplinary engagement and high collaboration levels. Offers guidance on how best to engage in team science to pursue complex questions, work effectively with team members, and produce high impact research that meets societys needs.
Second in a two-quarter series. Two-course sequence provides training in practical aspects of competitive grant writing. 
Provides an introduction to Comparative Effectiveness Research (CER) and methods for conducting CER.
Exposure to topical issues and controversies in the design of interdisciplinary translational research, with an emphasis on critical assessment of the biomedical and health sciences literature. Extends students knowledge of study design through practical application.
Focuses on the principles of needs identification and invention of biomedical technologies. Two part course provides a basic understanding of the elements of the innovation process and how to translate these principles into biomedical device design.
Focuses on the implementation of biomedical technologies and translational process. Two part course provides a basic understanding of the elements of the innovation process and how to translate these principles into biomedical device design. 
Lecture designed for graduate students who have experience in cell culture techniques. Designed to give a broad overview of the field and current cells of interest to the greater research community.
Critical presentation and analysis of recent articles in stem cell biology and small group discussions of the ethical issues surrounding this area of research.
Introduction to human stem cell biology; development of cellular therapeutics based on human stem cells for the treatment of currently incurable diseases; introduction to current Good Manufacturing Practice (cGMP), and theoretical & practical exploration of cGMP to manufacture such cellular therapies.
Underlying mechanisms of cardiomyopathy and heart failure.  Presentation of fundamental knowledge of and recent basic research on heart failure.   Student team projects: investigation and presentation of a research topic and bench research project to advance research in the same area.    
Current techniques used in clinical research such as electrophysiology, cardiovascular surgery, cardiac catheterization and echocardiography, team science, and patient management. Lectures are presented by experts on each technique, with an emphasis on use in translational research.
Cutting edge of research on underlying mechanisms of cancer development, progression and preventionclinical trials/drug development, signaling pathways and molecular mechanisms of cancer development, recent basic research on cancer stem cells, genetics and epigenetic events and animal models used.
Alternating sessions:  journal club, seminar/discussion, and research integration sessions. 
Analysis of data and design of experiments for laboratory data.
Emphasizes critical biostatistics for clinical research and targets biomedical audience. Students will develop understanding for basic planning and analysis of clinical studies and learn to develop collaborations with biostatisticians.
Statistical methods for experimental design and analysis of laboratory data including gene expression arrays, RNA-Seq, and mass spec.
Seminars presented by guest lecturers on subjects of their own research activities
Seminars presented by guest lecturers on subjects of their own research
Critical presentation and analysis of recent journal articles in stem cell biology by students.
Critical presentation and analysis of recent journal articles in translational research by students.
Special topics in Clinical Research appropriate for group study at the graduate level.  
Independent research and special topics in clinical research appropriate for graduate level.  

Social scientific research methods employed in Communication. Topics include research design, measurement, sampling, questionnaire construction, survey research, experimental design, content analysis and qualitative field methods.
Uses of social media technologies in contemporary public relations practice. Social and behavioral theories of social media processes and effects. Strategies and tools for authoring content that builds relationships and creates conversations with key publics. 
Communication processes within and among social organizations. Examines formal organizations as information processing systems. Topics include general systems theory, input-output analysis, structural-functionalism, cybernetics, organizational network analysis, organization environments, organizations as cultures, organizational learning, information technologies, and communication diagnostic/auditing strategies.  
Survey of web-driven social science and its methods.Focus on web scraping and social media APIs. Covers wrangling and analysis of data from social networks, online experiments, and other digital traces. Python programming skills helpful, but not assumed.
Group study of a special topic in communication.
Reading, discussion, research, and writing on a selected topic in the specialty of social interaction. Potential topics include relationship initiation, maintenance, and deterioration; communication failure; nonverbal communication; conversational management; semantics and pragmatics of languages; and family/marital communication.
Reading, discussion, research, and writing on a selected topic in the specialty of mass communication. Potential topics include, agenda-setting, the cultivation of beliefs, television violence, media portrayals of underprivileged groups, mediated political discourse, interactive technologies, and international/global communications.
Reading, discussion, research, and writing on a selected topic in health communication. Potential topics include health communication design and evaluation, media advocacy, physician-patient interaction, uses of communication technologies in health settings, and health-related advertising.
Reading, discussion, research, and writing on a selected topic in the specialty of organizational communication. Potential topics include organizational networks, organizational conflict and its resolution, mediation, bargaining and negotiation, superior-subordinate interaction, leadership styles, and inter-organizational communication.
Reading, discussion, research and writing on a selected topic in information and communication technologies. Potential topics include the role played by digital technologies in social change, serious games for change, and virtual and offline worlds.
Supervised work experience requiring the application of communication principles and strategies or the evaluation of communication practices in a professional setting. Relevant experiences include public relations, advertising, sales, human resources, health promotion, political campaigns, journalism, and broadcasting.
Directed reading, research, and writing culminating in the preparation of honors thesis under direction of faculty advisor.
Tutoring in undergraduate Communication courses, including leadership of discussion groups affiliated with departmental courses.

Social scientific study of Communication. Research on interpersonal, organizational, mass, political, and health communication; communication technologies (e.g., video games, social media, persuasive technologies); and communication network analysis.
Alternative meta-theoretical perspectives for theory generation in communication inquiry. Processes of construct explication, operationalization and theory construction. Emphasis on the critique of extant communication theories and the development of theory construction skills. 
Social scientific research methods commonly employed in Communication. Topics include research design measurement sampling questionnaire construction survey research experimental design evaluation research content analysis and qualitative field methods.
Experimental designs in communication. Topics include: causation; threats to validity; conceptualization, operationalization, and measurement; hypothesis testing; ethics; data analysis software focusing on the analysis of variance and planned contrasts; and the practical and effective implementation and writing of experiments.
Methods for designing personal interview, phone, mail, and web-based surveys in communication. Topics include: sampling strategies, sources of error and bias in survey designs, questionnaire construction, cognitive interviewing, interviewer behavior, and analysis of complex survey data using standard software packages.
Applications of data science to web-based communication research. Design, implementation, analysis, and reporting of studies using online data. Use of Python to scrape, organize, analyze, and visualize web data.
Simulation methods for modeling human communication. Single and multiple agent approaches to developing process theories of cooperation, coordination, strategic behavior, information and innovation diffusion, and other aspects of sociality.
Major social scientific theories and perspectives on attitude change and persuasion. Application of persuasion theories and principles to persuasive message design in applied contexts.
Explores the cognitive structures and processes that enable the production, comprehension and interpretation of messages in face-to-face and mediated communication contexts. Explores the communication outcomes associated with these processes.
Theories and models of individual risk information processing. Media depictions of threats and risk-related information and their potential effects on audiences. Implications for the design and implementation of messages concerning threat and risk.    
Survey of theories and research on social interaction and interpersonal communication. Covers communication codes, individual differences in communication, communication and relationship development, family communication, conflict, cognitive and emotional processes underlying social interaction, social influence, intercultural communication, and nonverbal behavior.
Achievement of interpersonal goals in social interaction. Topics include message production; tactics, strategies and planning; anticipating potential obstacles; resisting and thwarting goals; plan recognition; and goal detection. Examined goals include compliance gaining, attitude change, ingratiation, information seeking, comforting, and deception.
Health communication theories and research traditions. Topics include consumer health information seeking; physician-patient interaction; information, social marketing, edutainment, and media advocacy campaigns;  social networks and coping; media influences on health; and new communication technologies in health promotion and healthcare delivery.
Principles of health communication campaign planning, implementation and evaluation. Strategies for changing health behaviors, shaping policy, and improving healthcare organizations relations with stakeholders.
Theory and research on communication processes in organizations.
Survey of major theories on the intended and unintended effects of mediated communication. Topics include media's effects on learning, political behavior, interpersonal violence, sexual socialization, consumer behavior, race relations, gender socialization, and cultural processes. 

Strategic uses of media and interpersonal channels to promote social change through social marketing, information, and media advocacy campaigns. Focus on theory-based interventions in a variety of applied contexts.
Reading, discussion, research, and writing on a selected topic in the specialty of social interaction. 
Reading, discussion, research, and writing on a selected topic in the speciality of mediated communication.
Reading, discussion, research and writing on a focused topic in health communication.
Reading, discussion, research, and writing on a selected topic in the specialty of organizational communication.
Students in the Department of Communication graduate programs conduct dissertation research and writing under the supervision of a faculty member. 

Internship on and off campus in a consumer science related area.
Provides a set of behavioral concepts and theories useful in understanding consumer behavior on the part of the individual, business, and social organizations. Conceptual models to help guide and understand consumer research will be presented.
Internship on and off campus in a consumer science related area
Introduction, through class discussion and frequent written assignments, to some of the major books of western civilization such as The Odyssey, Aeneid, Bible, and Augustine's Confessions.
Introduction, through class discussion and frequent written assignments, to some of the major works of the ancient world (up to 5th century CE) such as The Odyssey, the Bible, Augustine's Confessions, and works by Plato and Confucius. Examined genres include religious texts, the epic, philosophy, drama, poetry. 
Introduction to the methods of inquiry applied to critical reading and the practice of writing. Focus on texts from the European Middle Ages to the eighteenth century; critical analysis of the historical-cultural developments in this period.
Introduction, through class discussion and frequent written assignments, to some of the major works of the medieval and early modern worlds (6th century to the mid-17th century) such as Dantes Comedy, 1001 Nights, The Tale of Genji, and Elizabethan/Jacobean plays. Examined genres include framed narratives, courtly literature, and early modern drama.
Introduction, through class discussion and frequent written assignments, to the major literature and thought of the late eighteenth to the mid-twentieth century.
Introduction, through class discussion and frequent written assignments, to some of the major works of the modern world (mid-17th to the mid-20th centuries) such as those by Dostoevsky, Tolstoy, Flaubert, Woolf, Lu Xun, Borges and Yeats. Examined genres include realist fiction, modernist fiction, and modernist poetry. 
Comparative study of selected major Western and non-Western texts composed in the period from 1945 to the present. Intensive focus on writing about these texts, with frequent papers written about these works.
Comparative study of selected major Western and non-Western texts composed in the period from 1945 to the present. Intensive focus on writing about these texts, with frequent papers written about these works.
Consideration, in literary works from different ages, of visionary and rational perceptions of a lost paradise, Golden Age, or Atlantis-and of the inhuman nightmares that can result from perversions of the utopian dream of perfection.
Survey of fiction, drama, and poetry by women writers from all continents. Concerns of women compared in light of their varied social and cultural traditions. Literary analysis of voice, imagery, narrative strategies and diction.
Introduction, through careful reading of selected plays, to some of the major forms of Western drama, from the earliest tragedies of ancient Greece to the contemporary American theater.
Comparative study of poetry in a variety of lyric and other poetic forms from different historical periods and different linguistic, national, and cultural traditions.
Representations of the human psyche in literature and other media (film, visual arts, music) spanning cultures and historical contexts. Depictions of abnormal psychological states, including madness, obsession, and self-fragmentation. Textual interpretation informed by psychological theories. Rhetorical persuasion and nuanced argumentation.
Study of literary texts from various periods and cultures whose theme is the representation of animals.
Consideration of a broad range of writers who speak from an ethnic perspective different from the nominally or politically dominant culture of their respective countries and who explore the challenges faced by characters significantly affected by their ethnic minority status.
Examination of a special topic in a small group setting.


Comparative, cross-cultural study of a topic, theme, or movement in world cinema beyond the boundary of a single national tradition. Topics may include "postsocialist cinemas in East Europe and Asia," "cinema and globalization," and "popular Asian cinemas."
Hong Kong cinema, its history, industry, styles, genres, directors, and stars. Special attention to its polyglot, multicultural, transnational, colonial, and postcolonial environment.  
Introduction to Japanese cinema from early silent films to the present. Explores important directors, genres, stars, themes and techniques in relation to specific historical and cultural contexts. Lectures and readings in English. Films in Japanese with English subtitles. 
Study of representations, descriptions, and discussions of humankind's problematical relationship with the non-human world in texts written in a variety of European and American traditions between 1750 and the present.
Critical analysis of Renaissance texts with primary focus on issues such as human dignity, education and gender politics; "high" and "low" culture and its relation to literary practices.
Shakespeare's representations of the classical world in the light of selected ancient texts and Renaissance conceptions of Antiquity, with special attention to the depiction of politics and history.
Introduction to critical theory and its use for interpreting literary texts, film, and media forms in global culture.
Close reading of selected texts; scrutiny of very limited amount of material, with attention to the problems of texts in translation.
Study of the "grotesque" in selected texts from the Renaissance to the 20th century, with attention to the "grotesque" as a means of social, cultural, and political commentary, as well as of aesthetic innovation.
Comparative study of different versions of one or more central myths, with attention to their cultural settings, artistic and literary forms of representation, as well as to their psychological dimensions.
Problems of the modern Jewish experience from the perspective of the writer's construction of the self in relation to the future and to the non-Jew. Draws upon Russian, German, Yiddish, and American traditions.
Literary introduction to the cultural issues of colonialism and postcolonialism through reading, discussing and writing on narratives which articulate diverse points of view.
Study of the various stylistic, historical, social and cultural factors that contribute to a hemispheric vision of American literature, encompassing works by Canadian, United States, Caribbean, Brazilian, and Spanish-American writers.
Various stylistic, historical, social, and cultural factors that contribute to a hemispheric vision of American literature, encompassing works by Canadian, United States, Caribbean, Brazilian, and Spanish-American writers. May be taught abroad.
Introduction to distinctive Asian literary forms, such as haiku, noh, the Chinese novel and tale, through reading of major works. Comparison with Western genres and study of native and Western critical traditions.
Colonial and post-colonial sub-Saharan African literature and the African oral traditions from which it emerged. Genres and themes of African literature from the 19th century to the present.
Through study of a few major works from Western and non-Western literature, illuminates the way in which literature from antiquity to the present has dealt with the antinomy peace/war through the ages.
Portrayals of women in literature, comparing selected heroines who represent a particular theme, period, or genre. Texts range around the globe and from ancient to modern works, such as Lysistrata, Emma, Hedda Gabler, The Makioka Sisters, and Top Girls.
Medieval literary genres as the foundation for modern literary forms. Topics and themes as love, God, vision, nature, history and politics, and sign theory. 
Literature, new science, gender, politics, and exploration in European Renaissance. Readings in Petrarch, Machiavelli, Montaigne, Tasso, Ariosto, Stampa, Shakespeare, Lab and Aphra Behn.
Enlightenment writers such as Swift, Voltaire, Sterne, Rousseau, Wollstonecraft, and Kant. Emphasis on the revolutionary impact of 18th-century philosophical ideas and literary forms on modern political, social, and aesthetic culture.
Comparative approach to the multi-lingual, multi-cultural literatures of the Caribbean. Works from English, French, and Spanish speaking regions with special attention to problems of identity, diaspora and resistance, class, gender, race.
The novel as global genre: picaresque, epistolary, Bildungsroman, historical novel, contemporary forms. 
Pivotal works of artists in the Western mainstream, such as Dante, Shakespeare, Cervantes, Goethe, Tolstoi, Proust, and Joyce.
Introduction to the Romantic movement with emphasis upon Romantic concepts of the self, irony, love, the imagination and artistic creativity, and the relationship of the individual to nature and society.
Novels and plays by Dickens, Zola, Flaubert, Dreiser, Ibsen, and Strindberg investigate marriage & adultery, the city & its perils, the hardships of industrialization, the war between the sexes, the New Woman, and other 19th-century themes.
Study of a selected topic or topics appropriate to student and facultyinterests and areas of specialization of the instructor.
Study of selected topics appropriate to student and faculty interests and areas of specialization of the instructor. May be taught abroad.
Internships in fields where students can practice their skills.
Guided research, under the direction of a faculty member approved by the Program Director, leading to a senior honors thesis on a comparativetopic.
Advanced study of selected topics and texts in Comparative Literature, with explicit emphasis on the theoretical and interpretive approaches that define Comparative Literature as a discipline and distinguish it from other literary disciplines. Required for the major.
Tutoring in undergraduate courses including leadership in small voluntary discussion groups affiliated with current courses offered by Comparative Literature.
Comparative, interpretive study of the treatment of specific topics and themes in literary works from various periods, societies, and cultures, in light of these works' historical and sociocultural contexts.
Analysis and interpretation of poetic texts in different historical periods and national literatures, with consideration of major theoretical developments in the understanding of poetic discourse.
An exploration, culminating in a research paper, of changing forms of the quest for transcendence in different cultures, mainly in major works of Western literature, but also in other traditions and from the perspectives of other disciplines.
Comparative literature of major works in a particular genre from various linguistic, national, and cultural traditions, with particular attention to historical developments within the genre and to genre theory.
Study of how literary texts from different periods, societies, and cultures represent gender roles and gender hierarchy, building on recent work on gender in anthropology, literature, psychology, and women's studies.
History, theory, and methodology of comparative literature. Issues of national literature, world literature, and comparative literature. Relation of comparative literature to other disciplines and diverse expressions. Discussion of current problems in teaching and research in comparative literature. Required of M.A. and Ph.D. candidates.
Development in 19th-century history, culture, and society in relation to major trends in the 19th-century novel.
Directed Independent Study in Primary, Secondary, or Third Literature culminating in term paper. Only for languages with no graduate course offerings.

Discussion of the theory and practice of teaching composition at the college level in a department of comparative literature in relation to the major cultural and social developments and with specific application to the introductory COM 001, COM 002, COM 003, COM 004.

Supervised internship, off and on campus, in community and institutional settings.

Impact of technology on labor relations, employment, industrial development and international relations. Internal relations of technology development and deployment.
Industrial cluster formation and institutions. Technology, labor relations and interfirm linkages in global value chains. California and other regions are used as case studies.
Globalization and technological restructuring of economic activity focusing on new spatial patterns of production and circulation and their implications for workers, communities and societies, both in the U.S. and around the globe.
Geography of rural environment with emphasis on rural restructuring. Demographics, community, economy, governance, agriculture, and environmental conservation in rural areas of industrialized world. Case studies from and comparisons drawn between North America, Europe, Australia, New Zealand, and Japan.
Introduction to statistical analysis of social data relevant to community research, planning and assessment, emphasizing data sources and acquisition, descriptive and inferential analysis techniques, and data interpretation and presentation. Emphasis on spatial data and methods, focusing on the sources, processing, analysis, and presentation of spatial data in a community assessment context.
Design and analysis of community research considering the relationship between theory and practice. Community research methods, including elite interviewing, ethnographic approaches, and statistical methods, descriptive statistics and OLS regression. Requires design and completion of field research project. 
Design and analysis of community research considering the relationship between theory and practice. Community research methods, including elite interviewing, ethnographic approaches, and statistical methods, descriptive statistics and OLS regression. Requires design and completion of field research project. 
Introduction to principles and strategies of community organizing and development. Examination of non-profit organizations, citizen participation, poverty reduction, community needs assessment, and regional development strategies. Comparison of community development approaches of the U.S.A./California with other western and non-western societies.
Examination and analysis of community development efforts in a range of Asian countries and the impact of global forces in different settings. Includes classroom lectures, workshops, field trips, and collaborative action research projects. Taught abroad.
Examination and analysis of community development efforts in Europe and the impact of global forces in different settings. Alternative strategies with emphasis on self-reliance and locally controlled development. Based in Freiburg, Germany, including field trips to France and Switzerland; taught abroad.
Examination and analysis of community development efforts in Africa and the impact of global forces in urban and rural settings. Focus on strategies that promote self-reliance and locally controlled development. Based in South Africa; includes field trips.   
Comparative overview of the dominant social science paradigms for the study of community development and change. Among the paradigms discussed are functionalism, conflict theory/Marxism, structuralism, methodological individualism, reflexive modernity.
Comparative overview of the dominant social science paradigms for the study of community development and change. Among the paradigms discussed are functionalism, conflict theory/Marxism, structuralism, community capitals, social exchange, post-positivism, feminist theories and social constructivism.
How government and community organizations help firms grow and create jobs through local economic development corporations, small business centers, revolving loan funds, incubators, and other programs. Techniques to analyze community economic potential and identification of appropriate intervention tools. Group project.
Governing institutions and political processes in rural and small urban places. Local government organization, community autonomy, leadership, political change, policy development, and select policy issues including public finance. Field research on political processes or policy issues in select communities.
Governing institutions and political processes at the local level. Local government organization, community autonomy, leadership, political change, policy development, and select policy issues including public finance. Topics change depending on student interest. Field research on coalition building or policy issues in select communities.
Analysis of the relationship between work, technology, and the human experience. Theories of the causes and consequences of labor process, changes under capitalism and globalization, impacts of race/ethnicity, class, gender, and citizenship status on work in the United States and globally; responses of workers, communities, and policy-makers to workplace changes. 
Planned change within and through community organizations. Private voluntary organizations, local community associations, and local government. Relationship between community organizations and social capital. Collaborative original data gathering and professional report writing.
Focus on the dimensions, causes, and means of alleviating social inequality in the U.S. Examination and analysis of major theories and forms (class, race/ethnicity, gender, and citizenship status) of inequality. Policy-based and grassroots approaches to change.               
Role of ethnicity in shaping social systems and interaction. Analytical approaches to and issues arising from the study of ethnicity, through utilization of data from a range of different societies.
The effects of grassroots, non-state, non-corporate actors from abroad on local, national and international development. Socioeconomic, political, and cultural implications of transnational actions undertaken by international non-governmental organizations, individual migrants, and migrant grassroots civic organizations.
Supervised internship, off and on campus, in community and institutionalsettings.
Community & Regional Development Honors is a program of direct reading, research and writing culminating in the preparation of a Senior Honors Thesis under the direction of a faculty advisor.
Community & Regional Development Honors is a program of direct reading, research and writing culminating in the preparation of a Senior Honors Thesis under the direction of a faculty advisor.
Assisting instructor in one of the Community & Regional Development's regular courses by tutoring individual students or small groups of students in a laboratory, in voluntary discussion groups, or other voluntary activities. 
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.
Spatial analysis of social data relevant to community research, with focus on neighborhoods as units of analysis. Clustering, segregation, geodemographic modelling, spatial regression, mulitlevel models, spatial data management, accessibility.
Economic theories and methods of planning for communities. Human resources, community services and infrastructure, industrialization and technological change, and regional growth. The community's role in the greater economy.
Theory and praxis of organizations with social change agendas at the community level. Emphasis on non-profit organizations and philanthropic foundations.
Theory and praxis of organizations with social change agendas at the community level. Emphasis on local governance, non-profit organizations and philanthropic foundations at an international level. May be taught abroad.
Application of social science theories of race, ethnicity, class, gender, and power to understand the production and contestation of environmental inequities.
Community development from the perspective of geographical political ecology.  Social and environmental outcomes of the dynamic relationship between communities and land-based resources, and between social groups. Cases of community conservation and development in developing and industrialized countries.
How global, political and economic restructuring and national and state policies are mediated by community politics; social production of urban form; role of the state in uneven development; dynamics of urban growth and decline; regional development in California.
Theoretical perspectives and empirical research on social, cultural, political, and economic processes of transnational migration to the U.S. Discussion of conventional theories will precede contemporary comparative perspectives on class, race, ethnicity, citizenship, and the ethnic economy.
Exploration of the ways that the experience, organization, and systems of work are being reconfigured in the late-20th century. The impacts of economic restructuring on local communities and workers.
Theories and comparative histories of modern welfare states and social policy in relation to legal/normative, organizational, and administrative aspects. Analysis of specific social issues within the U.S./California context.
Theories and comparative histories of modern welfare states. Theories of welfare & social policy in relation to normative, organizational, and administrative aspects of welfare & social policy. 
Analysis of a specific set of social issues within the U.S./California context. Issues may include poverty, hunger, housing, health, family, disability, economic opportunity, affirmative action orientations, gender, old age, or special social groups.
Help develop the practical skills needed to work professionally in organizations that are involved in community development. Provides an overview of community development planning, project management, and consultation skills.
Individually designed supervised internship, off campus, in community or institutional setting. Developed with advice of faculty mentor.
Introduction to graduate training in Community Development. Seminar designed to introduce students entering graduate work in the Community Development Graduate Group to its ongoing activities.
Introduction to critical theory and its use for interpreting literary texts, film, and media forms in our present global culture.
Critical analysis and discussion of pre-20th century theories of literary and cultural criticism. Topics may include but are not limited to: ancient and early modern philosophy; nature and culture in the Renaissance; theories of Mimesis from antiquity to the Renaissance.
Application of theoretical principles to one specific research topic. May be repeated for credit with consent of instructor when topic differs.


Histories and traditions of cultural studies internationally;  multiple legacies of cultural studies as a field of inquiry in various geographical contexts; foregrounds important critical perspectives resulting from social and intellectual movements world-wide.
Definitions of "critical" scholarship and examination of various contexts in which cultural studies theory has emerged worldwide. Both mainstream and alternative theoretical traditions, such as those developed by people of color and by other minoritized groups.
Methodological and practical applications of cultural studies research. Critical analyses of ethnography, textual analysis, social change, community development, and identity formation. Emphasis given to students' unique versions of cultural studies practices.
Studies of sexuality in feminist, literary, historical, and cultural studies research, specifically examining the emergence of "sexuality" as a field of research and the relationship of sexuality studies to cultural forms, subjectivity, and social relations generally.
Theoretical framework for the critical study of race, drawing on contemporary cultural studies and postcolonial scholarship in order to understand the social production of "race" as a category for organizing social groups and determining group processes.
Contemporary theories of nation, nationalism, postcolonialism, and transnationalism. Specific attention to the relationship between cultural production and the formation of ideas about nation and nationalism, including examination of both "legitimizing" and resistant discourses. 
Explores the multiple convergences among memory, culture, and human rights. Discusses diverse approaches to how societal actors in different historical, cultural, and national settings, construct meanings of past political violence, inter-group conflicts, and human rights struggles.
Survey of critical and analytical approaches to the study of texts.  Examination of multi-mediated objects to understand their cultural import by focusing on discursive production, dispersal, and reception processes, and related shifts in power relations.
Framework for the analysis of political and popular cultural representations.  Emphasis on concepts, theories, and methodologies illuminating dominant and vernacular cultural representation, appropriation, and innovation in transnational contexts.  
Designed to facilitate student interaction and promote student research by guiding students through the production of a publishable essay.  Essays submitted, distributed, and discussed by seminar participants.
Individually guided research, under the supervision of a faculty member, on a Cultural Studies topic related to the student's proposed dissertation project to produce a dissertation prospectus.
Individually guided research, under the supervision of a faculty member, on a Cultural Studies topic related to the student's proposed dissertation project to produce a dissertation prospectus.
Individually guided research, under the supervision of a faculty member, on a Cultural Studies topic related to the student's proposed dissertation project to produce a dissertation prospectus.
Designed to provide cohort identity and faculty student exchange.  Opportunity to present papers, hear guest lecturers, and see faculty presentations, gather for organizational and administrative news, exchange information, and make announcements.
Special topics courses offered according to faculty and student interests and demands.


History of media from 1945 to present, with particular focus on the development of the computer, digital network and internet technologies in the context of other media infrastructures like radio, television and satellite networks.  Analysis of inter-related cultural/political topics.
Theory and practice of the art and business of film costume design. Script analysis, costume research, developing design concepts, budgeting, and current production practices and methods. Execution of designs for period and contemporary films. Viewing of current films.
Iranian cinema of the 20th century in the context of profound cultural and social changes in Iran especially since the Iranian Revolution. Productions by representative directors such as Kiarostami, Makhmalbaf, Bahram Beizaie are included. Knowledge of Persian not required.  
South Asian cinema of last 100 years in the context of cultural, social, and political changes. South Asian history, Independence, Partition, urban life, class, migration, postcolonial identity, diaspora, gender, sexuality, religion, sport, performance, etc.
English language survey of Chinese film, from its inception to the end of the 20th century. Chinese films as important texts for understanding national, transnational, racial, gender, and class politics of modern China.
Study of the ubiquitous presence of CCTV, face recognition software, global tracking systems, biosensors, and data mining practices that have made surveillance part of our daily life.  Study boundaries between security and control, information and spying.
Critical approaches to the study of video games, focusing on formal, historical, and cultural modes of analysis. History of software and hardware in North American and global contexts. Relations of games to society, politics, economics, literature, media, and the arts.
Analysis and practice of acting skills required for camera work and digital media.
Fundamentals of molecular biology and chemical engineering involved in recombinant DNA technology. Topics: principles of rate processes of biological systems, optimization of bioreactors, and issues related to overexpression and production of recombinant molecules. Participation in student-directed team projects.
Research at a biotechnology company or interdisciplinary cross-college lab for a minimum of three months as part of the Designated Emphasis in Biotechnology Program.
Seminars presented by guest lecturers on subjects of their own research activities. 
Approval of project prior to internship by preceptor. Supervised work experience involving research on the skin. Final report.
Special study by individual arrangement of specialized topics in biology of skin. Work may be assigned readings, laboratory research or a combination.
Independent research in cellular and biochemical mechanisms of cutaneous biology and pathology.
Cell biology, pathology, and physical diagnosis of the skin. Recognition of normal variations, and common or important dermatoses. Patient demonstrations of select conditions.
Observation and participation in dermatology clinics/practice and participation in Ward Rounds and Dermatology Clinics at UC Davis Medical Center, Kaiser, and private practitioner offices. 
Externship provides in-depth exposure to one of a variety of sub-specialties in Dermatology.
Work at the level of a sub intern in Inpatient and/or Outpatient settings. Expectation is to provide direct patient management.
Integrated, multi-specialty approach to the microscopic diagnosis of inflammatory and neoplastic skin disorders. 
Clinical experience limited to observation of delivery of dermatologic care and attendance at some conferences.
An integrated, multi-specialty approach to clinical soft tissue wound healing.
Individually arranged study of special topics in clinical dermatologydetermined by student and instructor. Assigned readings and/or clinical examination of selected patients.
Research, either laboratory or clinical, on ongoing projects within the department under supervision of faculty.
Drawing as a tool for design. Basic skills in objective observation and representation, including line, shape, tone, and space. Drawing as a tool for formulating and working through design problems.
Understanding color, form and composition as ways of communicating design concepts and content. Color theory, color mixing, interaction of color. Design principles and elements. Gestalt theory. Explores a variety of materials, media and presentation techniques.
Introduction to digital tools with emphasis on graphic design including theory, practice and technology. Includes principles of color, resolution, pixels, vectors, image enhancement, layout, visual organization, visual hierarchy, typography. 
Introduction to mechanical drafting, including scaled drawing, orthogonal projection, isometric, axonometric and perspective. Includes basic rendering techniques.
Design concept development and detailing as it relates to the making of objects, structures and models using form, scale and materials. Product design and rapid prototyping methods using a range of techniques for advancing the design process.
Computer-assisted drawing (CAD) and modeling using a mid-level, multi-use CAD program. Basic architectural drawing and modeling technique in both two-dimensional and three-dimensional CAD environments.
Introduction to diverse methods for creating textile structures. Exploration of the creative potential of hand-constructed textiles, manipulation of fabric to create dimensional surfaces, and the basics of building and joining fabric structures.
Study and practice of designing clothing for the human body. Emphasis on flat pattern development, structural joining sequences and the development of three-dimensional garments from two-dimensional drawings.

Advanced study and practice of designing clothing for the human body through pattern development and structural joining. Emphasis on draping techniques and advanced conceptualization for fashion design.
Programming concepts/skills for design. Algorithm-based design and development flowcharts. Pseudo-code entry level programming. Principles of coding logic syntax structure. Analysis of history. Development iteration presentation of design projects. 
Conceptual approaches, technical practice for interactive media using the front-end stack (html, css, js). Conceptual framework, user experience, visual interface and interaction design. Research and written pre-production materials required.
Digital imaging techniques using black/white and color. Critical analysis of photographs and the role of photography in society. Explore use and meaning of single, sequence and single composite images.
Fundamentals of letterforms and typography. Characteristics of typefaces; formatting and composition of type. Principles of legibility, visual hierarchy, grid systems, and the integration of type and image.
Multiple, conceptually-linked assignments focusing on the fundamental choices designers make in translating concepts into effective graphic form. Problem finding and analysis of audience needs. Design process from research and initial concepts to project prototypes. May be taught abroad.
Practice of creating interactive visual media for network-based applications and principles of human computer interaction. Responsive design. User-centered research, information architecture, interface and interaction. Analysis of usability. Development and presentation of design production materials and completed interactive projects.
Practical introduction to design ethnography through project-based work. Tools and methods, observation, interviews, fieldnotes, and synthesis of qualitative data. Exploration of participatory design. Examination of the ethical questions.
Principles, practice and materials of contemporary sustainable design in the context of environmental crisis. History of sustainable design in relation to the fields of textiles, visual communication, interior architecture, exhibition design and lighting.  
Principles, practice and materials of contemporary sustainable design in the context of environmental crisis. History of sustainable design in relation to the fields of product design, material science, energy, architecture, and transportation. 
Analysis and practice of sustainable design within studio context. Design project that incorporate the reuse of post consumer waste; standard materials vs. sustainable materials; Cradle to Cradle philosophy and practice. Field trips required.
Exploration of materials, embellishments, and structural techniques derived from historic and contemporary world cultures. Emphasis on unique qualities of individual expression applied to hand made textiles, fashion and textile products. May be taught abroad.
Foundation in handwoven textile structure and design, emphasizing yarn identification, basic drafting, basic weaves and their derivatives explored in context of original color effects and yarn combinations.
Intermediate level study of complex fabric structure with emphasis on pattern in relation to surface, dimension, and material.
Introduction to the theory and practice of interior design with focus on residential spaces. Basic methods of design conceptualization, development, and presentation.
Introduction to the theory and practice of interior design with focus on small commercial and technical spaces. Archetypal spaces, non-residential building systems, ADA accessibility, design programming and research methods.
Development of designs for contemporary furniture. Consideration of behavioral and physical requirements, cultural and historic expression, and structural and aesthetic qualities. Process includes research, drawings, and construction of scale models. Required field trip. 
Design and construction of full size prototype furniture based on preliminary work completed in DES 135A. Material technology, construction methods, and finishes discussed. Development of shop drawings and furniture construction. Required field trip.
Introduction to lighting design and technology. Understanding the role of lighting and vision in the development of functional and aesthetically pleasing environments.  
Design and manipulation of light sources, luminaires, and lighting controls to enhance the functional and aesthetic impact of interior and exterior spaces.  Industrial design projects explore lighting effects, light distribution characteristics, and luminaire design.
Emphasis on understanding the effect of daylight on the perception of interior designs as well as on vision, luminous and thermal comfort, health and energy efficiency.
Introduction to daylighting through observation of its effects on interior designs using scale models of interior designs of choice and photographing them outdoors and in CLTCs Heliodon to understand year-round performance.
Introduction to the finish materials used for interior design with special emphasis on sustainable and recycled products. Performance factors, relative costs and energy impacts, installation conditions and construction details, and design potential for a full range of interior materials.  
Thematic survey of interior architecture. Emphasis on dwellings in their cultural settings and development of modern interior design theories. Interiors considered in relation to buildings' exteriors, sites, and uses.
Historical developments of visual communication, concentrating on the technological and aesthetic development of graphic design; origins and manifestations of current issues in visual communication; provide framework for analysis of current and future trends in visual communication.
Design principles and visual strategies for effective information display; analysis of contemporary and historical examples of visual representations and visual narratives in science, humanities, and the arts; emergence of digital methods for interactive data presentation.
Computer assisted drawing and modeling using a mid-level, multi-use CAD program. Basic architectural drawing and modeling technique in both two-dimensional and three-dimensional CAD environments.
Computer assisted drawing and modeling using a mid-level, multi-use CAD program. Basic architectural drawing and modeling technique in both two-dimensional and three-dimensional CAD environments.
Computer-assisted architectural presentation including the development of complex 3D models, techniques of photo-realistic rendering and computer simulation of movement through architectural and interior space.
Fundamentals of creating motion-based, screen-based typography.  Consideration of narrative structures, movement assemblage, and other visual languages, synthesized within a nuanced understanding of typography within digital space. May be taught abroad.
Principles and application of visual design strategies for projects that address a broad public audience. Emphasis on design for social awareness/interaction/benefit. Creation of public visual-media campaign.
Experimental approaches to form-making through an examination of pattern, form, and surface in historical and contemporary contexts. Explorations of alternative design processes, methods, and materials that open up new possibilities for content creation and invention in design practice.
New media and its impact on environmental design; analysis of contemporary projects at the intersection of architecture and new media; time-based strategies of representation; digital narrative.
New media and its impact on environmental design; analysis of contemporary projects at the intersection of architecture and new media; time-based strategies of representation; digital narrative.
Conceptual approaches, technical practice for interactive media using the front-end stack (html, css, js). Conceptual framework, user experience, visual interface and interaction design. Research and written pre-production materials required.
Principles of effective information display including aspects of language, structure, legibility, sequencing, and context. Analysis of historical examples of typographic, diagrammatic, and cartographic excellence. User-centered research. Development and presentation of iterative design prototypes. Design that informs, connects, and inspires. 
Use of traditional and contemporary processes to create images and patterns on fabric using a variety of dyes, including direct applications, bound and mechanical resists, and surface additives. 
Design of textiles and screen printing on fabrics; soft-product development; integration of hand-produced and digitally generated imagery on cloth.
3D studio methods for design, including: historic and contemporary developments in industrial design; innovation in material and fabrication technology; design based projects for everyday objects including soft goods, electronics, transportation. 
Human-centered approach to problem solving, ethnography, ideation, project framing, rapid prototypes, visual communication, and experiential learning. Creative approaches to graphic design, industrial design, fashion, business, and entrepreneurship. 
Human-centered approach to problem solving, ethnography, ideation, project framing, rapid prototypes, visual communication, and experiential learning. Creative approaches to graphic design, industrial design, fashion, business, and entrepreneurship. 
Exploration of rapid prototyping techniques for objects, interactive experiences, services and organizations. Understanding of additive manufacturing, foam models, digital interfaces and business models.  
Advanced exploration of textile design aimed at developing unique textiles for a specific end product such as a fashion collection, functional interior design, art textile or surface design competition. 
Experimental approaches to fashion and textile design. Emphasis on developing conceptual ideas and translating them into one-of-a-kind garments and soft products. Exploration of a variety of current topics including sustainability, pattern design, new technologies, and social activism.
Exploration of fashion design processes for industry within the social and physical context. Emphasis on two-dimensional conceptualization of ideas, garment construction, and ideation processes utilizing commercial textiles. Field trip required.
Advanced exploration of apparel design processes for industry and personal expression with emphasis on computer-assisted design applications. Field trip required. 
Introduction to wearable technology and related technologies. Emphasis on designing, and fabricating prototypes of wearable technology for value-added designs and to improve quality of life.
Introduction to wearable technology and related technologies. Emphasis on designing, and fabricating prototypes of wearable technology for value-added designs and to improve quality of life.
Advanced exploration of fashion design with an emphasis on professional portfolio development and presentation. Emphasis on conceptualizing, designing, and fabricating a cohesive line of wearable garments suitable for presenting in a public fashion show. 
Advanced interior design problems focused on complex institutional spaces. Introduction to building codes related to interior design. Integration of building systems with interior design solutions.
Advanced problems in interior architectural design emphasizing space planning for corporate and institutional environments. Field trips required.
Design of cultural and commercial exhibition environments, including exhibition development and object selection, spatial planning and architectural finishes, object placement and staging, interpretive strategies, exhibition and promotional graphics.
Design of informational and directional graphics for the built environment. Application and integration of typography, imagery and symbols into the architectural landscape. Development of universal wayfinding and graphic navigational systems to help people find their way. 
Design of storytelling environments and multi-sensory experiences for cultural, commercial, entertainment and public spaces. Interpretive planning and design for specific exhibit audiences. Manipulation of objects and the communication of complex ideas in the exhibition environment. May be taught abroad.
Philosophies of design explored through discussion and presentation of research results.
Faculty initiated workshops featuring advanced studies and applications of original work in Design: Costume. Letter grading by contract. Field trips included.
Faculty initiated workshops featuring advanced studies and applications of original work in Design: Environment. Letter grading by contract. Field trips included.
Faculty initiated workshops featuring advanced studies and applications of original work in Design: Graphics. Letter grading by contract. Field trips included.
Faculty initiated workshops featuring advanced studies and applications of original work in Design: Textiles. Letter grading by contract. Field trips included.
Supervised internship, off and on campus, in areas of design includingenvironmental, costume, textile, museum, display and interior design. 
Preparation and presentation of a culminating project. Supervision of an instructor in one of the creative or scholarly areas of Design.
Preparation and presentation of a culminating project. Supervision of an instructor in one of the creative or scholarly areas of Design.
Leading of small discussion groups or studio meetings affiliated with one of the department's regular courses.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.
Planning and development for student led DES 198F under the supervision of a faculty member.
Student-facilitated course under the supervision of a faculty member, an undergraduate student teaching a course under 098F/198F.
Perspectives on theoretical and aesthetic issues related to the design professions such as methodology in historical and contemporary contexts, implications of technology on design theory and practice, and design relationships to environmental sustainability, recycling, and other social issues.
Focused on research methods and critical writing related to design topics including case studies, original and secondary sources, critical reviews. Expectation of a paper meeting professional standards suitable for publication from each student at end of course.
Introduce students to issues of professional design practice: business ethics, contracts and business practices, social responsibility through case studies, guest lectures and field trips, and readings. Short written assignments and presentations will be required.
Work closely with instructor on a research and writing project related to subject matter of undergraduate history courses noted above with the goal of introducing student to advanced historical research processes and development of writing skills.   
Students work together on a collective project to experience the multiple phases of design through an iterative process. Design projects will be geared towards relevance in contemporary social, cultural and political contexts.
Selected topics in design methodology, research, communication, and education.
Interaction with a working professional in the student's field of interest to apply theories and concepts to working practice.

Advanced study in studio practice on independent projects with faculty consultation.
Student creates a body of original work at a professional level, withwritten and visual documentation of process and concepts underlying the project, culminating in public presentation.

Projects in acting, production, scene design, costuming, lighting, directing, and playwriting. Participation in departmental productions.  
Modern dance techniques. Basic anatomy, dance terminology and a general overview of modern dance history.
Warm-ups, dance techniques and combinations at the intermediate level. Basic anatomy, dance terminology and a general overview of jazz styles of historically significant jazz choreographers and leading contemporary jazz choreographers. 
Barre and center work at the intermediate level. Development andrefinement of technique through proper alignment, rhythmic, and qualitative understanding. Anatomy, ballet terminology, and dance history. 
Building on the fundamentals. Reviewing basics, extended improvising, skillfully working with partners of different sizes and abilities, advanced lifting, advanced safety practices, embracing risk and disorientation, subtle nuances of communication.
Expansion of Hip Hop dance vocabulary by focusing on mastering body isolations and intricate rhythmic techniques, complex dance combinations, advanced across the floor sequences.
Internship outside the Department of Theatre & Dance enabling students to practice their skills.
Study of six/eight plays on film, using mixed casts and raising issues of diversity. Focus: sociohistorical context for production and reception, interpretation and analysis of topics (gender, ethnicity, age, politics, philosophy), and filming, screenwriting, design, and acting/directing for film.
Implementation of acting tools drawn predominantly from Stanislavskys system. Gateway into the Advanced Acting courses.
In-depth study, analysis and performance of texts from different eras, genres and styles. Implementation of tools to undertake independent preparation of character creation.
Development of rehearsal practice and etiquette, using a variety of scenes from different eras and genres. Established to enable visiting artists in residence to undertake the instruction, as well as faculty.
Study of psycho-physical techniques to create characters with an emphasis on non-realistic styles.
Study and practice of various devising techniques, to collaborate on and produce a series of short etudes and dramatic scenes/short plays.
Study and performance of classical texts (monologues and dialogues), with a focus on Shakespeare and the Elizabethan world view. 
Intensive study and practical exploration of a specialized area; for example, World Theatre, Social Theatre, Physical Theatre, Musical Theatre, the Ancient Greeks, etc. 
Scene design processes, working drawings, sketching techniques, scale models, methods and materials of scenery construction.
Analysis of plays in terms of scene design, elements of design, execution of designs for modern and period plays.
Theories of lighting the stage, equipment and control systems, execution of lighting plots.
Source materials for theatrical costuming, selecting fabrics, elements of design, analysis of plays in terms of costume design, execution of designs for modern and period plays.
Theory and practice of the art and business of film costume design. Script analysis, costume research, developing design concepts, budgeting, and current production practices and methods. Execution of designs for period and contemporary films. Viewing of current films.
Scene painting techniques, practices and materials including color mixing and matching, wood graining, faux painting techniques, glazing, creating foliage, stone and brick.
Director's creative approach to the play and to its staging.
Director's creative approach to the actor.
Advanced design study in specific areas including but not limited to: research, design styles and concepts, new materials and techniques, scenery, lighting, costume, makeup, photography, projections, computer technology, spectacle and special effects, and alternative theatre forms and genres.
Progression of exercises to free, develop and strengthen the voice, as a human and then as an actor's instrument with emphasis on how the voice works, to freeing the channel for sound, to interpersonal communication. 
Introduction to the craft of choreography. Compose phrases and present movement studies based on the elements of choreography: motivation, space, time, force/energy.
Continuation of the study of choreography, focusing on the development of group choreography: duets, trios, quartets and group work, form, and accompaniment.
Continuation of study of choreography focusing on sequencing movements for groups. The relation between dance and allied mediums of music, sets, costumes and lighting. Students conceptualize a choreographic issue and explore it through creation of short dance studies.
Special studies in dance and movement such as African, Balinese, Baroque, Chinese, European, and stage combat. Offered as needed for stage productions.
Traditional Chinese Wushu practices, explored through practical work in dance laboratory conditions. Integration of practice with conceptual analysis; contemporary social, educational and artistic applications.
Daoist practices of movement and their relation to daoist philosophy, explored through work in dance laboratory conditions. Integration of practice with conceptual analysis, and critical philosophy around values and ethical action.
Conceptualization, creation, casting, rehearsing, and concert presentation of complete dances, with students integrating elements of stagecraft and directing the on-stage rehearsals.
Conceptualization, creation, casting, rehearsing, and concert presentation of complete dances, with students integrating elements of stagecraft and directing the on-stage rehearsals. 
Professionally oriented performance training. Rigorous, consistent training regimen based on traditional modern dance technique. Breath and voice, skeletal and muscular placement, moving from the spine, contraction technique, movement intention.
Body and space relationships in solos, duets and group work; stylistic variations of Graham technique; works of Paul Taylor.
Continuation of DRA 146B. Time as a theatrical device, sustaining movement and non-movement, phrasing, musicality.
Focused inquiry into a particular genre, period, movement, artist, or theme in performance. Philosophical and aesthetic issues as well as historical and cultural performance contexts. In-depth research projects in relationship to the subject of inquiry.
Analysis of dramatic structure; preparation of scenarios; the composition of plays.
Analysis of dramatic structure; preparation of scenarios; the composition of plays.
Analysis and practice of acting skills required for camera work and digital media.
Lecture and intensive workshop teaching small-scale film production. Appointments as a(n) director, director of photography, actor, writer, lighting designer, sound designer and other critical positions are used to produce and submit a short film to a film festival.
Projects in acting, production, scene design, costuming, lighting, directing, and playwriting. Participation in departmental productions.
Rehearsal and performance of a production directed or choreographed by visiting Granada Artists-in-Residence and/or faculty, and/or the UG Edge Festival.
Design-related participation in Theatre & Dance productions involves research, creation and implementation of design concept in collaboration with the director and other members of the production team.
Participation in Theatre & Dance production in management, direction, choreography, dramaturgy, writing or other production related role; research, creation and implementation of production concept in collaboration with members of the production team and cast. 
Participation in Theatre & Dance production in management, direction, choreography, dramaturgy, writing or other production related role; research, creation and implementation of production concept in collaboration with members of the production team and cast.
Participation in Theatre & Dance productions as backstage running crew which will involve skill development, rehearsal and execution of performance.
Practical experience working on scenery and properties for Theatre & Dance department productions. Study and execution of basic scenery and prop engineering, construction, painting, rigging. Study of techniques, materials, tools, and equipment use. Skill development, professional etiquette. Safety training requirement.
Practical experience working on costumes for Theatre & Dance department productions. Study and execution of basic costume construction techniques and materials, tools, and equipment use. Skills development, professional etiquette. Safety training requirement.
Practical experience working on lighting, sound or projections for Theatre & Dance department productions. Study and execution of basic techniques, materials, tools, and equipment use. Skill development, professional etiquette. Safety training requirement.
Preparation and presentation of a culminating project, under the supervision of an instructor, in one of the creative or scholarly areas of Theatre & Dance.
Preparation and presentation of a culminating project, under the supervision of an instructor, in one of the creative or scholarly areas of Theatre & Dance.
Leading of small voluntary groups affiliated with one of the department's regular courses.


Review a progression of exercises to free, develop and strengthen the voice, first as a human instrument, and then as an actor's instrument using various texts such as Shakespeare, Ibsen and contemporary plays. Required for the M.F.A. degree in Acting.
Application of modes of exploration, breath placement, and the use of imagery as well as Laban's effort/shape system as a method of analysis in classic and modern plays. 
Advanced acting problems arising from differences in the type and style of plays selected from Greece to the present.
Group study while focusing primarily on one discipline: scenic, costume or lighting design. Periods covered: Greek, Medieval, Renaissance, Shakespearean, Jacobean, early 17th century. Design projects include script analysis, research of period style, fashion, character development, developing design concepts, presentation skills.
Group study focusing primarily on one discipline: scenic, costume or lighting design. Periods covered: Cavalier, Restoration 18th century opera and ballet, 19th century drama. Design projects include script analysis, research of period style, fashion, character development, developing design concepts,presentation skills.
Group study focusing primarily on one discipline-scenic, costume or lighting design. Genres covered in 20th century: Realism, Brecht, Musicals, Contemporary   Dance, short narrative film. Design projects include script analysis, research of period style, fashion, character development, developing design concepts, presentation skills.
Group study focusing primarily on one discipline: scenic, costume or lighting design. Emphasis on contemporary design concepts for new works and classics: Shakespeare, modern dance, concept plays and musicals. Script and character analysis for design in performance, research, design projects.
Group study focusing primarily on one discipline: scenic, costume or lighting design. Emphasis on special issues in contemporary design concepts for new works and classics. Script and character analysis for design in performance, research, design projects.
Exploration and development of techniques and skills in the performance design process. Drafting, model building, drawing, painting and rendering, costume drawing, color theory, lighting techniques, design portfolio preparation and presentation. 
Modern directing theory as it applies to non-realistic theatre; development of directorial concepts for production of selected non-realistic plays-Greek to the present; emphasis on textual analysis.
Projects in directing scenes selected from plays from ancient Greece to the present.
Explores contemporary issues of choreography and performance in depth and how those issues pertain to performance work. Focus will include contemporary thought on representation, legibility, new forms, and cultural attitudes.
Introduction to traditional systems for body movement, development of critical approaches to them, and experiments in how they inform training and practice in theatre, dance, and performance. 
Theatre of Europe and America, 1860-1940, with emphasis on the relationship of the dramas of the period to the physical circumstances under which they were produced.
Process of weaving together various performance elements brought into play by the artists in their respective disciplines. The "script" is the thread from which the artists' "scores" will layer and transform the "script" into performance for specific time, place, spectators.
Innovative theories of creating performance spaces, establishing a sense of place, and communicating the concept of time explored through collaborative interaction. Research includes traditional principles, site-specific spaces and consideration of various tempi from music and movement.
Exploration of different approaches to collaboration among artists in different media and their influence on the creative process.
Historical and contemporary theories of constructing stage identities. Discussion and project collaborations based on theories. Questions of identity related to ethnicity, gender or sexual orientation.
Examine manner in which specific elements utilized by actors, dancers, directors, choreographers, and designers are combined or related to form a whole in space and time, as well as methods of sequencing used by each discipline to produce artistic products.
Exploration of different approaches and methods to the visual elements of performance. Focus on design and style for different media and genres, storytelling through visual elements of performance.
Interdisciplinary seminar for first- and second-year M.F.A. students in Theatre & Dance. Topics range from current practice in dance, theatre, film and performance, to leading edge developments by outstanding practitioners in the field.
Special topics designed to study in depth aspects of contemporary performance including performance analysis, cultural and historical context, modes of production, theoretical and political entailments, and issues of spectatorship; e.g., "Brecht & After," "British Theater," "Race & Gender in Performance."
Instruction is offered a variety of disciplinary approaches and methodologies in Performance & Practice, with a focus is on cross-disciplinary learning and research. Usually offered each quarter.
Introduces students to the literature of performance production in a variety of media: theatre, dance, film, video, computer-based, looking at cultural, aesthetic, rhetorical and political theory. Usually offered in alternate years.
Introduces students to analysis of the body in performance, drawing on theoretical models from several fields.
Introduces students to the role of performance (broadly defined), in everyday life, sociopolitical negotiation, identity, social movements, the media, and the state.
Introduction to the theory, history and criticism, informing performance studies.
Advanced practice in acting, designing, directing, playwriting, and technical theatre.

Individual study.
Dissertation research.

Approved for graduate degree credit. Lectures, demonstrations, and practical work in aspects of theatrical make-up.
Ongoing education, training, and experience in an ophthalmic specialty practice dealing with equine patients. Learn to take histories related to ocular problems, to competently examine an eye, and to perform basic diagnostic procedures.
Overview of how CAHFS interfaces with the production animal industry and practitioners. Understanding of the laboratory approach to the diagnosis of predominately production animal diseases.
Approved program of study to receive training and experience in specific areas outside the School of Veterinary Medicine. These include private practice, industry, and academic institutions and allow students to pursue specific career paths with excellent educational opportunities.
To gain knowledge and experience in various aspects of veterinary education and leadership, students will work under faculty mentorship to assist in the delivery of the content in a block in years 1, 2 or 3 of the curriculum. This could be in the form of co-presenting a lecture, co-teaching a lab, facilitating a PBL, or other content-related activities deemed appropriate by faculty.
Overview of how CAHFS interfaces with the production animal industry and practitioners. Understanding of the laboratory approach to the diagnosis of predominately production animal diseases.
Approved program of study to receive training and experience outside the School of Veterinary Medicine. Opportunities include private practice and provides first-hand experiences in diagnostic and therapeutic capabilities and management and business methods in the private sector.
Diagnostic techniques of history taking, cardiac physical examination, electrocardiography, radiography, echocardiography, and cardiac catheterization and medical, interventional, and surgical therapy of cardiac disorders will be taught along with the etiology and pathophysiology of various cardiac disorders.
Focus on the practical use and application of laboratory testing in a practice setting to facilitate optimal management of patients.
Practice wellness care in pediatric and adult patients, address medical management of geriatric patients, and develop a practical, problem-oriented approach to routine medical issues presenting in general practice.
General surgery service to include instruction in physical exams, basic anesthesia, pain management and routine surgeries. Sample surgeries include routine spays and neuters, cystotomy, mass removal, digit amputation, encluceation, etc.
Basic components of husbandry, nutrition, handling, diseases, medical and surgical treatment of companion exotics including avian (companion and wildlife), small exotic mammal, reptilian, amphibian and aquatic animal patients.
Examination, diagnosis and treatment of small animals presenting with oral or dental diseases.
Exposure to veterinary dermatology. Learn the importance of obtaining a good history, performing a good physical examination and characterizing lesions. Various diagnostic and therapeutic techniques specific to dermatology will be demonstrated.
In-depth training and hands-on experience in various facets of equine emergency case management, including the diagnosis, management, and treatment of equine emergency patients.
Provide service for emergency surgical and medical management for all equine and camelid emergencies; i.e., colic, wounds, musculoskeletal injuries, septic foals, dystocia, and neurologic and ophthalmologic emergencies.
On-farm practical experience in the diagnosis, treatment and prevention of equine disease problems.
Learn and practice the highest level of equine internal medicine with the goal to generate or implement a problem-oriented approach to clinical problems, determine a diagnostic work-up, prognosis and treatment plan for patients.
Routine reproductive management in small and large animals in a tertiary referral setting at the VMTH. Participate in weekly clinical and endocrinology rounds.
Advanced training and experience in equine surgery services to manage all orthopedic and non-orthopedic elective surgical disorders as well as equine lameness disorders.
Introduction to the normal structure and function of the equine foot. Principles of corrective shoeing for many lameness disorders.
General surgery service to include instruction in physical exams, basic anesthesia, pain management and routine surgeries. Surgeries include routine spays and neuters and other minor procedures such as simple mass removals.
Advanced training and experience in equine surgery services to manage all orthopedic and non-orthopedic elective surgical disorders as well as equine lameness disorders.
Improve clinical skills required to manage cases in the Small Animal Service including comprehensive histories, performing complete physical examinations, obtaining samples, interpreting results, conducting special procedures and assisting faculty and residents in the diagnosis, prevention, management and treatment of disease.
Exposure to general medicine outpatient cases and to develop a practical, problem oriented approach to routine medical issues presenting in general practice.
Overview of how CAHFS interfaces with the production animal industry and practitioners. Understanding of the laboratory approach to the diagnosis of predominately production animal diseases.
Overview of how CAHFS interfaces with the production animal industry and practitioners. Understanding of the laboratory approach to the diagnosis of predominately production animal diseases.
Individual animal medicine and surgery as well as herd reproductive 
Hands-on clinical experience diagnosing, treating, and managing medical and surgical diseases of primary care and referral cases involving dairy cattle, beef cattle, sheep, dairy goats, meat goats, and pigs.
Exposure to individual animal medicine and surgery as well as herd reproductive programs on the farm. A regular client base with a variety of species is served: dairy cattle, beef cattle, goats and sheep.
Advanced training and experience in a clinical dairy health and production medicine delivery system. Exposure to contemporary dairy production and population medicine programs. Develop the ability to communicate with producers and farm employees.
In-depth training and hands-on experience in various facets of equine emergency case management, including the diagnosis, management, and treatment of both equine emergency medical and surgical patients.
Provide exposure to various management activities and techniques used by laboratory animal veterinarians both antemortem & postmortem to support animal research primarily involving rodents but may include many vertebrates from fish to non-human primates.
Advanced training and experience in anesthetic management, acute care problem-solving and decision-making of healthy and physiologically stressed large animal patients.  
Training in the art of making quality radiographs of large animal patients and interpreting radiographic studies.
Hands-on experience in the ultrasonographic diagnosis of primarily musculoskeletal injuries and abdominal disorders in horses and the occasional non-equine patient.
Emergency practice includes the immediate recognition, evaluation, and care of patients with acute illness and injury.
Provide specialized veterinary care for animals with neurological diseases; i.e., disorders of the brain, inner ear, spinal cord, and vertebrae and diseases affecting muscles, nerves and the neuromuscular junction.
Advanced training and experience in the principles and practice of small animal clinical nutrition.
Advanced training and experience in diagnosis, staging, medical management, and prognostication of cancer in animal patients.
Ongoing education, training, and experience in an ophthalmic specialty practice dealing with companion and exotic species. Learn to take histories related to ocular problems, to competently examine an eye, and to perform basic diagnostic procedures.
Lameness examinations and treatments for all orthopedic diseases to include osteoarthritis, developmental diseases, trauma-induced injuries and cancer. Both medical and surgical treatments are used and presented to owners in an evidenced based fashion.
Advanced training and experience to develop a general understanding of the nature of common pathologic lesions and their interpretation in light of clinical history. Postmortem techniques and practice in writing descriptions of gross lesions.
Acquire skills to perform physical examinations, blood collection, cystocentesis, catheter placement, fluid therapy, basic wound care, bandaging, suturing, amputations, and orogastric tube feedings.
Staging and treatment of patients with cancer and use of radiation therapy in the treatment of cancer in companion animals. Management of clinical patients, the indications for radiation therapy and technical aspects treatment planning and dose calculations.
Exposure to all areas in a variety of shelters in the Sacramento and Bay Area. Accompany Shelter Medicine Program personnel on consultations; depending on schedule.
Participate in physical rehabilitation evaluation to diagnose movement dysfunction, design and effectively implement an evidence-based treatment plan to restore, maintain or enhance optimal physical function after injury, surgery or disability. Emphasis on development of observation and manual assessment skills.
Experience in anesthetizing small animals in a clinical setting.
Emergency practice includes the immediate recognition, evaluation, and care of patients with acute illness and injury.
Gain and demonstrate competence in both the immediate and ongoing care of a diverse group of critically ill small animal patients. Gain proficiency in invasive procedures, cardiopulmonary resuscitation, stabilization of the respiratory distress patient and hemodynamic stabilization. 
Improve clinical skills required to manage cases in the Small Animal Service including comprehensive histories, preforming complete physical examinations, obtaining samples, interpreting results, conducting special procedures and assisting faculty and residents in the diagnosis, prevention, management and treatment of disease.
Participate in technical aspects of producing radiographs, interpreting radiographic and other diagnostic imaging studies and performing diagnostic ultrasound exams.
Participate in management of cases referred for advanced surgical techniques to include all aspects of case management from hospital admission to discharge including daily case rounds.
Understand the importance of behavior in companion animal practice, primarily that of dogs and cats. Apply the knowledge to prevent and treat problematic behaviors in companion animals.
Research rotations are designed for combined degree students who require a period of time (up to 19 weeks) to complete a discrete portion of their thesis work.
Focus on the application of basic fish health principles to address current problems as experienced by fish as held for research, as large populations in state fish hatcheries and as part of the collection of large public/private aquaria.
Experience in order to become proficient in performing physical examinations and collecting diagnostic samples form a variety of non-domestic animals. Majority of rotation time spent providing patient care at the Sacramento Zoo.
Hands-on approach to numerical methods for compressible fluid flow.Readings and discussions of solution strategies will be complemented with programming exercises and projects to give first-hand experience with performance and accuracy of several computational methods;from upwind differencing to Godunov methods.
Special topic in Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics.
Special topic in Chemical Physics.
Special topic in Computational Physics.
Special topic in Biophotonics/Biotechnology.
Special topic in Materials Science.
Special topic in Imaging Science and Photonics.
Special topic in Nonlinear Optics.
Special topic in Plasma/Fusion Energy Physics.
Special topic in Quantum Electronics.
Special topic in Condensed Matter/Statistical Physics.
Special topic in Classical Optics.
Special topic in Microwave and Millimeter-Wave Technology.
Special topic in Synchrotron Radiation Science.
Special topic in Space Physics.


Development of general equations of fluid motion. Study of flow field kinematics and dynamics. Flow about a body. Thin airfoil theory. Viscous effects. Applications of numerical methods to wing analysis and design.
Development of general equations of fluid motion. Study of flow field kinematics and dynamics. Flow about a body. Thin airfoil theory. Viscous effects. Applications of numerical methods to wing analysis and design.
Principles, governing equations, and predictive theories for aircraft aerodynamics. Lift and drag of 2D airfoils, 3D wings, and high-lift devices. 
Aircraft and spacecraft stability and control. Derivation of fundamental equations of motion for aircraft/spacecraft. Fundamentals of feedback. Aircraft flight control systems. Spacecraft attitude control systems.
Major aircraft design experience with multiple realistic constraints including aerodynamics, performance analysis, weight estimation, stability and control, and appropriate engineering standards.
Major aircraft design experience including detailed design, cost analysis, analysis of aircraft structure, propulsion system, aerodynamics, aircraft handling qualities, manufacturing, or meeting relevant engineering standards.
Introduction to the aerospace structural design process. History of aircraft and spacecraft materials. Effects of loading beyond elastic limit. Deflections and stresses due to combined loading. Virtual work principles, and finite element methods. Applications to aerospace structures.
Analysis and design methods used in aerospace structures. Shear flow in open, closed and multicell beam cross-sections, buckling of flat and curved sheets, tension field beams, local buckling.
Overview of materials and technology for creating structures from fiber reinforced resin matrix composite material systems. Elementary design analysis and case studies emphasizing aeronautical applications.
Analysis/design of modern aircraft gas turbine engines. Development/application of cycle performance prediction techniques. Introduction to design of inlets, compressors, burners, turbines, and nozzles. Cycle design for specific applications.
Fluid and thermodynamics of rocket engines, liquid and solid rocket propulsion. Space propulsion concepts and space mission requirements.
Introduction to space systems design including space project organization, requirements definition and specification, concepts formulation, system tradeoffs, subsystem design. Prototype space mission concepts are presented and a multidisciplinary mission design is developed that considers all relevant architecture elements.  
Satellite orbits, multistage rockets, current global boosters, and new technologies. Design application problems include satellites, trajectory optimizations, and interplanetary trajectories.
Governing equations and operational practices of robotic and human space travel. Principles of Systems Engineering are introduced and are used as a basis for a team project in spacecraft reverse-engineering and design. 
Teaches flight test techniques together with data analysis methods to prepare students for any type of flight testing including fixed wing, rotary wing and launch vehicles. 


Seminar examines the academic, cultural, and personal issues of study abroad, including academic programs abroad, country-specific history and culture, cross-cultural experiences, culture shock, racial and gender issues.
Students who participate in approved international programs take this course up to 12 units while studying abroad.
Seminar examines the academic, cultural, and personal issues of study abroad, including academic programs abroad, country-specific history and culture, cross-cultural experiences, culture shock, racial and gender issues.
Internship with Education Abroad program, potentially either at university or taught abroad.
Knowledge of Chinese not required. Viewing and analysis of one Chinese film with English subtitles each week, followed by discussion and short essays. Cinematic technique, social values and film topics from 1930s to today. 
Political, social, cultural, and economic issues in East Asia. Topic varies each year.  
Work experience in the East Asian Studies field, with analytical term paper on a topic approved by the instructor.
Guided research, under the direction of a faculty member, leading to a senior honors thesis on a topic in East Asian Studies culture, society, or language.
A two-quarter research project culminating in an Honors thesis. A grade of B or higher must be earned to qualify the student for honors distinction at graduation.
A two-quarter research project culminating in an Honors thesis. A grade of B or higher must be earned to qualify the student for honors distinction at graduation.

Properties of typical biological materials; composition and structure with emphasis on the effects of physical and biochemical properties on design of engineered systems; interactions of biological materials with typical engineering materials.
Research group conference. 
Supervised work experience in biological systems engineering.  
Group study of selected topics; restricted to lower division students.
Fluid mechanics axioms, fluid statics, kinematics, velocity fields for one-dimensional incompressible flow and boundary layers, turbulent flow time averaging, potential flow, dimensional analysis, and macroscopic balances to solve a range of practical problems.
Traction and stability of vehicles with wheels or tracks. Operating principles of field machines and basic mechanisms used in their design.
Applications of engineering principles to problems in forestry including those in forest regeneration, harvesting, residue utilization, and transportation.
Design and performance of power devices and systems including combustion engines, electric generators and motors, fluid power systems, fuels, and emerging technologies.  Selection of units for power matching and optimum performance.
Fundamentals of heat transfer with application to biological systems.  Steady and transient heat transfer.  Analysis and simulation of heat conduction, convection and radiation.  Heat transfer operations. 
Fundamentals of heat transfer with application to biological systems. Steady and transient heat transfer. Analysis and simulation of heat conduction, convection and radiation. Heat transfer operations.
Fundamentals of mass transfer and kinetics in biological systems. Molecular diffusion and convection. Thermodynamics and bioenergetics. Biological and chemical rate equations. Heterogeneous kinetics.  Batch and continuous reaction processes. Mass transfer operations.
Anatomical, physiological, and biomechanical bases of physical ergonomics. Human motor capabilities, body mechanics, kinematics and anthropometry. Use of bioinstrumentation, industrial surveillance techniques and the NIOSH lifting guide. Cumulative trauma disorders. Static and dynamic biomechanical modeling. Emphasis on low back, shoulder and hand/wrist biomechanics.
Techniques for modeling processes through mass and energy balance, rate equations, and equations of state. Computer problem solution of models. Example models include package design, evaporation, respiration heating, thermal processing of foods, and plant growth.
Techniques for modeling processes through mass & energy balance, rate equations, and equations of state. Computer problem solution of models. Example models include package design, evaporation, respiration heating, thermal processing of foods, and plant growth.
Biological responses to environmental conditions. Principles and engineering design of environmental control systems. Overview of environmental pollution problems and legal restrictions for biological systems, introduction of environmental quality assessment techniques, and environmental pollution control technologies.
Fundamentals of groundwater flow and contaminant hydrology. Occurrence, distribution, and movement of groundwater. Well-flow systems. Aquifer tests. Well construction operation and maintenance. Groundwater exploration and quality assessment. Agricultural threats to groundwater quality: fertilizers, pesticides, salts. 
Engineering and scientific principles applied to the design of surface, sprinkle and micro irrigation systems and drainage systems within economic, biological, and environmental constraints. Interaction between irrigation and drainage.
Practical hydrology and runoff water quality management from disturbed watersheds. Development of hillslope and soils restoration concepts and practice, modeling and application. 
Provide the basic principles of reactor design for bioprocess applications. Emphasizes the following topics: 1) kinetics and reactor engineering principles; 2) bio-reaction kinetics; and 3) bioreactor design.
Instrumentation and control for biological production systems. Measurement system concepts, instrumentation and transducers for sensing physical and biological parameters, data acquisition and control.
Engineering design including professional responsibilities. Emphasis on project selection, data sources, specifications, human factors, biological materials, safety systems, and professionalism. Detailed design proposals developed for EBS 170B and EBS 170BL.
Individual or group projects involving the design of devices, structures, or systems to solve specific engineering problems in biological systems.  Project for study is jointly selected by student and instructor.
Individual or group projects involving the design of devices, structures, or systems to solve specific engineering problems in biological systems.
Individual or group projects involving the fabrication, assembly and testing of components, devices, structures, or systems designed to solve specific engineering problems in biological systems. Project for study previously selected by student and instructor in EBS 170B.
Individual or group projects involving the fabrication, assembly and testing of components, devices, structures, or systems designed to solve specific engineering problems in biological systems.
Fluid and solid rheology, viscoelastic behavior of foods and other biological materials, and application of rheological properties to food and biological systems (i.e., pipeline design, extrusion, mixing, coating).
Special topics in Agricultural Engineering. 
Special topics in Aquacultural Engineering. 
Special topics in Biomedical Engineering.
Special topics in Biotechnical Engineering.
Special topics in Ecological Systems Engineering.
Special topics in Food Engineering.
Special topics in Forest Engineering.
Research group conference.
Supervised work experience in biological systems engineering.
Tutoring individual students, leading small voluntary discussion groups, or assisting the instructor in laboratories affiliated with one of the department's regular courses. 

Planning, execution and reporting of research projects. Literature review techniques and proposal preparation. Record keeping and patents. Uncertainty analysis in experiments and computations. Graphic analysis. Oral and written presentation of research results, manuscript preparation, submission and review.
Continuum mechanics of static and dynamic air, water, earth and biological systems using hydraulic, heat and electrical conductivity; diffusivity; dispersion; strain; stress; deformation gradient; velocity gradient; stretch and spin tensors.
Continuum mechanics of static and dynamic air, water, earth and biological systems using hydraulic, heat and electrical conductivity; diffusivity; dispersion; strain; stress; deformation gradient; velocity gradient; stretch and spin tensors.
Mechanics of interactions between agricultural soils and tillage and traction devices; determination of relevant physical properties of soil; analyses of stress and strains in soil due to machine-applied loads; experimental and analytical methods for synthesizing characteristics of overall systems.
Theory and application of energy systems. Systems analysis, energy conversion technologies, environmental considerations, economics and system optimization.
Analysis and design of solar energy collection systems. Sun-earth geometry and estimation of solar radiation. Steady-state and dynamic models of solar collectors. Modeling of thermal energy storage devices. Computer simulation.
Topics in water treatment as they apply to aquaculture operations. Laboratory study of unit operations in aquaculture.
Epidemiology and etiology of occupational musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) with focus on low back and upper extremities disorders; anatomical and biomechanical functions of lower back and upper extremities; MSDs risk factors assessment and control; research opportunities related to MSDs.
Application of mass transfer principles to food and biological systems. Study of mass transfer affecting food quality and shelf life. Analysis of mass transfer in polymer films used for coating and packaging foods and controlling release of biologically active compounds.
Diffusion theory in drying of solids. Analysis of fixed-bed and continuous-flow dryers. Steady-state and dynamic models to predict performance evaporators: multiple effects, mechanical and thermal recompression, control systems.
Analysis and design of food processing operations. Steady state and dynamic heat and mass transfer models for operations involving phase change such as freezing and frying. Separation processes including membrane applications in food and fermentation systems.
Heat transfer and biological basis for design of heat sterilization of foods and other biological materials in containers or in bulk.
Theory and applications of magnetic resonance imaging to biological systems. Classical Bloch model of magnetic resonance. Applications to be studied are drying of fruits, flow of food suspensions, diffusion of moisture, and structure of foods.
Aspects of multi-phase flow in soils and their application to infiltration and immiscible displacement problems. Gas phase transport and entrapment during infiltration, and oil-water-gas displacement will be considered.
Computerized design of sprinkle and trickle irrigation systems. Consideration of emitter mechanics, distribution functions and water yield functions.
Mathematical models of surfaceirrigation systems for prediction of the ultimate disposition of water flowing onto a field. Quantity of runoff and distribution of infiltrated water over field length as a function of slope, roughness, infiltration and inflow rates.
Applications of deterministic and stochastic mathematical programming techniques to water resource planning, analysis, design, and management. Water allocation, capacity expansion, and reservoir operation. Conjunctive use of surface water and groundwater. Water quality management. Irrigation planning and operation models.
Characterization of solid and liquid wastes from animal, crop, and food production systems. Study of methods and system design for handling, treatment, and disposal/utilization of these materials.
Instrument characteristics: generalized instrument models, calibration, and frequency response. Signal conditioning: operational amplifiercircuits, filtering, and noise. Transducers: motion, force, pressure, flow, temperature, and photoelectric.
Procedural and object-oriented programming in C++, analog and digital signal conversion, data acquisition and computer control.
Simple linear, multiple, and polynomial regression, correlation, residuals, model selection, one-way ANOVA, fixed and random effect models, sample size, multiple comparisons, randomized block, repeated measures, and Latin square designs, factorial experiments, nested design and subsampling, split-plot design, statistical software packages.    
Applications of biotechnology and bioprocess engineering toward the use of agricultural and renewable feedstocks for the production of biochemicals.  Design and modeling of microbial- and plant-based production systems including associated fermentation, extraction, and purification processes.
Study of fundamental surface science theories as applied to physical and chemical interactions of carbohydrates and polysaccharides.
Mathematical modeling of biological systems: model development; analytical and numerical solutions. Case studies from various specializations within Biological & Agricultural Engineering.
Selected topics on physical properties, such as mechanical, optical, rheological, and aerodynamic properties, as related to the design of harvesting, handling, sorting, and processing equipment. Techniques for measuring and recording physical properties of biological materials.
Special topics in Animal Systems Engineering.
Special topics in Aquacultural Engineering.
Special topics in Biological Engineering.
Special topics in Energy Systems.
Special topic in Environmental Quality.
Special topics in Food Engineering.
Special topics in Forest Engineering.
Special topics in Irrigation & Drainage.
Special topics in Plant Production & Harvest.
Special topics in Postharvest Engineering.
Special topics in Sensors & Actuators.
Weekly seminars on recent advances and selected topics in biological systems engineering. Theme changes from quarter to quarter.
Research problems, progress and techniques in biological systems engineering.
Tutoring and teaching students in undergraduate courses offered in the Department of Biological and Agricultural Engineering. Weekly conferences with instructor; evaluation of teaching. Preparing for and conducting demonstrations, laboratories and discussions. Preparing and grading exams.
Quantitative introduction to the engineering principles of analysis and design. Applications of differential and integral calculus. Laboratory experiments using coffee to illustrate chemical engineering concepts and to conduct an engineering design competition.
Application of the principle of conservation of mass to single and multicomponent systems in chemical process calculations. Studies of batch, semi-batch, and continuous processes involving mass transfer, phase change, and reaction stoichiometry.
Problem solving in chemical, biochemical and materials engineering using MATLAB. Programming styles, data structures, working with lists, functions and rules. Applications drawn from material balances, statistics, numerical methods, bioinformatics, transport phenomena, kinetics, and computational analysis.
Directed Group Study.
Special Study for Undergraduates
Mathematical methods for solving problems in chemical and biochemical engineering, with emphasis on transport phenomena. Fourier series and separation of variables. Sturm-Liouville eigenvalue problems. Similarity transformations. Tensor analysis. Finite difference methods for solving time-dependent diffusion problems. 
Principles and applications of fluid mechanics in chemical and biochemical engineering. Hydrostatics. Stress tensor and Newton's law of viscosity.   
Conduction, convection, and radiation of thermal energy in applications to chemical and biochemical engineering. Derivation of thermal and mechanical energy equations. Thermal boundary layers. Macroscopic balances. Applications: heat transfer in tubes, channels, and integrated circuits, and analysis of heat exchangers.
Derivation of species conservation equations describing convective and diffusive mass transfer. Fick's law and the Stefan-Maxwell constitutive equations. Mass transfer coefficients. Multicomponent mass transfer across gas/liquid interfaces. Applications include drying, heterogeneous chemical reactions, and membrane separations. 
Deformation in steady shear, unsteady shear, and elongational flows. Linear and non-linear viscoelastic constitutive models. The principle of material indifference and admissibility of constitutive equations. Introduction to the unit operations of polymer processing.
Laboratory experiments in chemical engineering thermodynamics.
Laboratory experiments in chemical engineering transport phenomena.
Ideal chemical reactors. Rate laws and stoichiometry. Design and analysis of isothermal reactors with multiple reactions.
Design and analysis of non-isothermal reactors. Reactions in packed beds with pressure drop. Adsorption and heterogeneous catalysis.  Transport limitations.
Application of principles of thermodynamics to chemical processes.  
Continuation of ECH 152A.
Laboratory experiments in chemical kinetics, reactor design and process control.
Laboratory experiments in transport phenomena, chemical kinetics, and thermodynamics.
Laboratory experiments in transport phenomena, chemical kinetics, and thermodynamics.
Continuation of ECH 155A. Laboratory experiments in transport phenomena, chemical kinetics, and thermodynamics.
Continuation of ECH 155A. Laboratory experiments in transport phenomena, chemical kinetics, and thermodynamics.
Fundamentals of dynamics and modeling of chemical processes. Design and analysis of feedback control of chemical processes.
Senior design experience in process and product creation and design with multiple realistic constraints. Cost accounting and capital investment estimation. Profitability analysis techniques. Green chemistry, health risk assessment and life cycle assessment concepts.
Senior design experience with multiple realistic constraints. Heuristic and rigorous design of chemical process equipment. Separation by filtration, distillation and extraction. Synthesis of reactor and separation networks, heat and power integration.
Senior design experience for chemical and biochemical processes. Impact of multiple realistic constraints. Design, costing and profitability analysis of complete plants. Use of computer-aided design techniques. 
Principles of large scale bioreactor production of metabolites, enzymes, and recombinant proteins including the development of strains/cell lines, fermentor/bioreactor design, monitoring and operation, product recovery and purification, and biomanufacturing economics. 
Biokinetics; bioreactor design and operation; transport phenomena in bioreactors; microbial, plant, and animal cell cultures. 
Product recovery and purification of biochemicals.  Cell disruption, centrifugation, filtration, membrane separations, extraction, and chromatographic separation.
Design of biotechnology manufacturing facilities. Fermentation and purification equipment, and utility systems. Introduction to current good manufacturing practices, regulatory compliance, and documentation.
Design of biotechnology manufacturing facilities. Fermentation and purification equipment, and utility systems. Introduction to current good manufacturing practices, regulatory compliance, and documentation.
Laboratory experiments in the operation and analysis of bioreactors; determination of oxygen mass transfer coefficients in bioreactors and ion exchange chromatography.
Principles of catalysis based on an integration of principles of physical, organic, and inorganic chemistry and chemical kinetics and chemical reaction engineering. Catalysis in solution; catalysis by enzymes; catalysis in swellable polymers; catalysis in microscopic cages (zeolites); catalysis on surfaces.
Scientific and engineering principles underlying the preparation of mixed drinks. Thermodynamics and kinetics of ice crystallization; phase diagram of ethanol-water-ice mixtures; mass transfer of aromatics; solubility of sucrose and carbon dioxide; colloidal behavior of dispersed solids and emulsified oils. Corresponding laboratory experiments testing the effect of design choices on the sensory quality of cocktails.
Introduction to the behavior of surfaces and disperse systems. Fundamentals will be applied to the solution of practical problems in colloid science. Should be of value to engineers, chemists, biologists, soil scientists, and related disciplines. 
Research group conferences.
Supervised work experience in Chemical or Biochemical Engineering.
Group study.
Special study.
Interaction of chemical engineering, biochemistry, and microbiology. Mathematical representations of microbial systems. Kinetics of growth, death, and metabolism. Continuous fermentation, agitation, mass transfer and scale-up in fermentation systems, product recovery, enzyme technology.
Application of basic biochemical and engineering principles of practical enzymatic processes. Lectures cover large scale production and separation of enzymes, immobilized enzyme systems, enzyme related biotechnology, reactor design and optimization, and new application of enzymes in genetic engineering.
Survey of biodevice design from engineering and biological perspectives; micro-/nano-fabrication techniques; surface science and mass transport; essential biological processes and models; proposal development skills on merging aforementioned themes.
Advances in the field of biotechnology including genetic engineering, enzyme engineering, fermentation science, and renewable resources development. The important results of original research will be evaluated for understanding of the fundamental principles and for potential practical application.
A treatment of the statistical basis of thermodynamics;introduction to statistical mechanics; discussion of the laws of thermodynamics; application of thermodynamic relationships to phase and chemical reaction equilibrium; introduction to molecular simulations and the evaluation of thermodynamic properties from molecular simulations.
Kinematics and basic principles of fluid flow.  Principles of constitutive equations.  Navier-Stokes equations for Newtonian fluids.  Survey of rectilinear creeping flow, lubrication flow and boundary layer theory.  
Fundamental energy postulates and derivation of microscopic and macroscopic energy equations. Mechanisms of conduction.  Isotropic, thermoelastic and anisotropic materials solution problems using Greens functions and perturbation theory.  
Kinematics and basic conservation principles for multicomponent systems. Constitutive equations for momentum, heat and mass transfer, applications to binary and ternary systems. Details of diffusion with reaction, and the effects of concentration.
Thermodynamics and rate processes at interfaces. These fundamental processes will be applied to determine the collective propertiesof thin films and membranes, self-assembled systems, liquid crystals and colloidal systems. Experimental techniques in surface analysis.
Analysis of the performance of chemical reactors and design of chemical reactors based on the principles of chemical kinetics and transport phenomena. Consideration of noncatalytic/catalytic reactions in single fluid phases and emphasis on reactions in multiphase mixtures, especially gas-solid reactors.
Applications of methods of applied mathematics to the analytical and numerical solution of linear and nonlinear ordinary and partial differential equations arising in the study of transport phenomena.
Modern molecular simulation techniques with a focus on soft matter like polymers, biologically relevant systems, and glasses.
Heat, mass and momentum transfer in multiphase, multicomponent systems with special emphasis on transport processes in porous media. Derivation of the averaging theorem and application of the method of volume averaging to multicomponent, reacting systems. 
Mechanics of polymer solutions and suspension, especially the development of properly invariant constitutive equations. Topics include: viscometry, linear and nonlinear viscoelasticity, continuum mechanics, kinetic theory.
Thermodynamic and mechanical descriptions of surfactant-laden interfaces. Forces between and within interfaces. Physics of micelle and microemulsion formation. Structure and stability of emulsions. Properties of phospholipid bilayers, with emphasis on vesicles.
Advanced course in analysis and synthesis of linear multivariable systems. Emphasis on frequency domain techniques and applications to chemical processes. Topics include singular value analysis, internal model control, robust controller design methods as well as self-tuning control techniques.
Study of fundamental surface science theories as applied to physical and chemical interactions of carbohydrates and polysaccharides.
Introduction to fundamental mechanisms governing the structure, function, and assembly of bio-macromolecules. Emphasis is on a quantitative understanding of the nano-to-microscale interactions between and within individual molecules, as well as of their assemblies, in particular membranes.
Special topics in Fluid Mechanics.
Special topics in Nonlinear Analysis and Numerical Methods.
Special topics in Process Control.
Special topics in Chemistry of Catalytic Processes.
Special topics in Biotechnology.
Special topics in Interfacial Engineering.
Special topics in Molecular Thermodynamics.
Special topics in Membrane Separations.
Special topics in Advanced Materials Processing.
Special topics in Novel Experimental Methods.
Special topics in Advanced Transport Phenomena.
Special topics in Biomolecular Engineering.
Research problems, progress and techniques in chemical engineering.
Seminars presented by guest lecturers on subjects of their own research activities.
Group study.
Participation as a teaching assistant or associate-in in a designated engineering course. Methods of leading discussion groups or laboratory sections, writing and grading quizzes, use of laboratory equipment, and grading laboratory reports.
Introduction to civil infrastructure and its relationship with society and the natural environment. Exposure to innovative research on civil engineering and environmental systems. Participation in laboratory experiments illustrative of the solution of representative but simplified engineering problems.
Computational problem solving techniques for Civil & Environmental Engineering applications using structured C programming. Algorithm design applied to realistic problems.  
Computational problem solving techniques for Civil and Environmental Engineering applications using structured C programming. Algorithm design applied to realistic problems.  
Introduction to topics in environmental engineering; discussion on influence of literary work, art, and media on the evolution of environmental engineering practice, relevant laws, and regulations; presentations of historical case studies.
Examination of a special topic in a small group setting.
Supervised work experience in civil engineering.


Fluid flow in civil & environmental engineering, basis for design, buoyancy, hydrostatics, gravity dams, hydraulic modeling: similarity & scaling, conservation laws, flow in bends, nozzles, pipes, pumps, turbines, complimentary lab experiments.
Probabilistic concepts and models in engineering. Statistical analysis of engineering experimental and field data. Introduction to stochastic processes and models of engineering systems.
Presentation, implementation and application of numerical algorithms and computer models for the solution of practical problems in Civil and Environmental Engineering. 
Presentation, implementation and application of numerical algorithms and computer models for the solution of practical problems in Civil and Environmental Engineering. 
Fundamental skills in parallel computing for engineering applications; emphasis on structured parallel programming for distributed memory parallel clusters.
Fundamental skills in parallel computing for engineering applications; emphasis on structured parallel programming for distributed memory parallel clusters.
Systems-level approach of how to evaluate and then modify sustainability of urban systems based on interaction with natural environments. Topics include: definition/metrics of urban sustainability; system analyses of urban systems; enabling technology, policies, legislation; measures and modification of ecological footprints.
Mechanisms of energy consumption in buildings including end uses, thermal loads, ventilation, air infiltration, thermal energy distribution, and HVAC systems; energy performance simulation; methods and strategies of energy efficiency.
Elastic structural analysis of determinate and indeterminate trusses, beams and frames. Plastic bending and limit analysis.
Elastic structural analysis of determinate and indeterminate trusses, beams and frames. Plastic bending and limit analysis.
Matrix formulation and computer analysis of statically indeterminate structures. Stiffness and flexibility formulations for elastic structures. Finite element methods for elasticity and bending problems.
Design of metallic beams, columns, and other members for various types of loading and boundary conditions; design of connections between members; member performance within structural systems.
Strength design procedures for columns, rectangular beams, T-beams and beams of general cross-section. Building code requirements for bending, shear, axial load, combined stresses and bond. Introduction to prestressed concrete.
Design of a building structure for a specific need under the multiple constraints of safety, serviceability, cost and aesthetics.
Determination of loads on structures due to earthquakes. Methods of estimating equivalent static lateral forces; response spectrum and time history analysis. Concepts of mass, damping and stiffness for typical structures. Design for inelastic behavior. Numerical solutions and Code requirements.
Review of stress, strain, equilibrium, compatibility, and elastic material behavior. Plane stress and plane strain problems in elasticity; energy methods. Theories for unsymmetric bending, straight and curved beams. Beams on elastic foundations; stresses in plates and shells; elastic stability.
Introduction to "wet chemical" and instrumental techniques commonly used in the examination of water and wastewater and associated data analysis.
Introduction to "wet chemical" and instrumental techniques commonly used in the examination of water and wastewater and associated data analysis.
Aqueous chemistry; equilibrium relationships; carbonate system; thermodynamics; kinetics & rate laws; precipitation, adsorption, & volatilization phenomenon; oxidation & reduction reactions; pH, pE and predominance diagrams; organic chemicals.
Fundamental microbiology concepts for environmental engineers; provides background needed for the application of water and wastewater treatment, bioremediation, air pollution control and biotransformations in environmental engineered systems. 
Fundamental microbiology concepts for environmental engineers; provides background needed for the application of water and wastewater treatment, bioremediation, air pollution control and biotransformations in environmental engineered systems. 
Evaluation and design of water and wastewater treatment systems. 
Evaluation and design of water and wastewater treatment systems. 
Nature of flow of a real fluid; flow in pipes; open channel flow; turbomachinery; fluid forces on objects: boundary layers, lift and drag.
Laboratory experiments and demonstrations on flow measurements, sluice gates, hydraulic jump, flow characteristics, and centrifugal pumps.
The hydrologic cycle. Evapotranspiration, interception, depression storage and infiltration. Streamflow analysis and modeling. Flood routing through channels and reservoirs. Frequency analysis of hydrologic variables. Precipitation analysis for hydrologic design. Hydrologic design.
Application of concepts, goals and metrics of sustainability, green engineering and industrial ecology to engineering design. Other topics include life-cycle assessments, analysis of environmental management systems, and economics of pollution prevention and sustainability.
Groundwater occurrence, distribution, and movement; groundwater flow systems; radial flow to wells and aquifer testing; aquifer management; groundwater contamination; solute transport by groundwater; fate and transport of subsurface contaminants.  Groundwater supply and transport modeling.
Computer modeling of groundwater flow under regional gradient, well injection/withdrawal, and natural and engineered boundary conditions.  Use of Groundwater Vistas computer program.
Project-based course on the design of an integrated urban drainage system with focus on consideration of design alternatives, multiple realistic constraints, quantification of uncertainty, codes and standards, technical drawing and cost analysis. 
Computer simulation techniques in the analysis, design and operation of surface water systems; modeling concepts and practices with application to surface runoff; water quality in rivers and streams and dispersion of contaminants in water bodies.
Basic concepts of water quality measurements and regulations. Introduction to physical, biological and chemical processes in natural waters. Fundamentals of mass balances in water and wastewater treatment.
Physical and technical aspects of air pollution. Emphasis on geophysical processes and air pollution meteorology as well as physical and chemical properties of pollutants.
Design and evaluation of air pollution control devices and systems.
Operations research. Optimization techniques such as linear programming, dynamic programming, and non-linear programming. Applications in civil engineering disciplines, including multiple realistic constraints, through computer-based course projects.
Operations research. Optimization techniques such as linear programming, dynamic programming, and non-linear programming. Applications in civil engineering disciplines, including multiple realistic constraints, through computer-based course projects.
Basic engineering planning concepts; role of engineering, economic, environmental and social information and analysis; institutional, political and legal aspects. Case studies and computer models illustrate the planning of water resource systems.
Principles of transportation system operations; traffic characteristics and methods of measurement; models of transportation operations and congestion applied to urban streets and freeways.
Engineering, economic, and systems planning concepts. Analysis and evaluation of energy, air quality and selected environmental attributes of transportation technologies. Strategies for reducing pollution and petroleum consumption in light of institutional and political constraints. Evaluation of vehicle emission models.
Soil formations, mass-volume relationships, soil classification, effective stress, soil-water-void relationships, compaction, seepage, capillarity, compressibility, consolidation, strength, states of stress and failure, lateral earth pressures, and slope stability.
Laboratory studies utilizing standard testing methods to determine physical, mechanical and hydraulic properties of soil and demonstration of basic principles of soil behavior.
Foundation analysis and design, including site characterization, evaluation of shallow and deep foundation alternatives, evaluation of bearing capacity and settlements, design of retaining structures, and case-based design experiences.
Tectonics, faults, site response, and probabilistic ground motion prediction equations. Cyclic loading and liquefaction of soil elements and layers. Empirical procedures and field tests for evaluation of triggering and consequences, of liquefaction. 
Pavement types (rigid, flexible, unsurfaced, rail), their applications (roads, airfields, ports, rail) and distress mechanisms. Materials, traffic and environment characterization. Empirical and mechanistic-empirical design procedures. Maintenance, rehabilitation and reconstruction; construction quality; asphalt concrete mix design.
Directed group study in Environmental Engineering.
Directed group study in Hydraulics & Hydrologic Engineering.
Directed group study in Engineering Planning.
Directed group study in Geotechnical Engineering.
Directed group study in Structural Engineering.
Directed group study in Structural Mechanics.
Directed group study in Transportation Engineering.
Directed group study in Transportation Planning.
Directed group study in Water Resources Engineering.
Directed group study in Water Resources Planning.
Research group conferences.
Supervised work experience in civil engineering.
Culminating design experience for civil engineering and environmental engineering majors. Student teams work closely with faculty, city officials or consulting clients to propose, implement and validate a unique solution to a real-world problem. 
Culminating design experience for civil engineering and environmental engineering majors. Student teams work closely with faculty, city officials or consulting clients to propose, implement and validate a unique solution to a real-world problem. 

Special study.
Fundamental equations of elasticity in three dimensions; plane stress and plane strain; flexture and torsion of bars of various shapes. Introduction to variational and approximate methods.
Fundamentals of theories of plasticity, viscoelasticity and viscoplasticity for solids. Macroscopic constitutive modelling for engineering materials, e.g., metals, polymers, soils, etc., and microscopic motivation.
Tensor formulation of the field equations for continuum mechanics, including large deformation effects. Invariance and symmetry requirements. Introduction to nonlinear thermoelasticity and thermodynamics. Solution of three-dimensional problems. Selected topics.
Tensor formulation of the field equations for continuum mechanics, including large deformation effects. Invariance and symmetry requirements. Introduction to nonlinear thermoelasticity and thermodynamics. Solution of three-dimensional problems. Selected topics.
Linear and nonlinear fracture mechanics, stress analysis, energy concepts, brittle fracture criteria, path independent integrals, Dugdale-Barenblatt model, general cohesive zone models, ductile fracture criteria, crack tip fields for stationary and propagating cracks, fatigue.  Application of numerical methods for fracture mechanics.
Analysis of complex frameworks by the displacement method; treatment of tapered beams, curved beams, and beams on elastic foundations; partially rigid connections; geometric and material nonlinearities; buckling; flexibility-based formulations; FEM-software for nonlinear analysis of structures.
Weighted-residual and Rayleigh-Ritz methods.  Weak/variational formulation and development of discrete equations using finite element approximations.  Application to one- and two-dimensional problems (heat conduction).
Application to linear and nonlinear structural mechanics problems. Linear elasticity, weak form, and finite element approximation.  Incompressible media problems. Non-linear problems with material nonlinearity. 
Analysis of structures subjected to earthquake, wind and blast loading; distributed, consistent and lumped mass techniques; computer implementation; nonlinear response spectrum; frequency and time domain analysis; seismic protection of structures; numerical methods in linear and nonlinear structural dynamics.
Advanced discretization techniques such as meshfree methods and partition of unity finite elements for the Galerkin solution of boundary-value problems in solid and structural mechanics. Application of meshfree and extended finite element methods in computational fracture.
Development of classical and refined plate theories. Application to isotropic, orthotropic and composite plates. Solutions for rectangular and circular plates. Membrane theory for axisymmetric shells and bending of circular shells.
Signal processing and system identification of structures under dynamic excitations; Fourier and Laplace transforms; data acquisition and sensor design fundamentals; sensor technologies/techniques for nondestructive evaluation; structural control; actuators and dampers for smart structures; piezoelectrics and acoustic emissions; micro- and nano-fabrication.
Ductility of reinforced concrete; strength of two-way slabs; modified compression field theory.
Review of Load and Resistance Factor Design (LRFD); steel-plate girder design; plastic design of indeterminate systems; moment frames and bracing systems; connection design; seismic design of steel structures; vibration of flooring systems; steel-concrete composite design.
Survey of methods and applications; prestressing materials and systems; prestress losses; flexural design; design for shear and torsion; deflection computation and control; continuous beams and indeterminate structures; floor systems; partial prestressing; design of compression members; strut-and-tie models.
Applications of cement composites; materials selection and proportioning; component and composite properties; hydration reactions and microstructure development; mechanisms of failure; nondestructive test methods; fiber reinforcement; concrete durability; novel reinforcing materials; ferrocement; repair and retrofit technologies; applications to structural design.
Basics of mechanics and design of polymer matrix composites: composite classification, manufacturing process, micromechanical property determination, classical lamination theory, strength theories, first-ply-failure, test methods, design practice, strengthening and retrofitting of existing reinforced concrete structures.
Bridge types, behavior and construction characteristics; design philosophy, details according to Caltrans and American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials codes, principles; seismic design and retrofit of concrete bridges; modern bridges using advanced fiber reinforced polymer composites; fieldtrip required.
Modern seismic design; performance-based seismic design; seismic hazard; seismic demands: linear and nonlinear procedures; performance assessment: deterministic and probabilistic procedure; review of FEMA-350, FEMA-356, ATC-40 and other performance-based guidelines.
Effects on environmental impacts from materials selection and design in the built environment. Material mechanics, design constraints, and life cycle assessment in the development of greener materials and systems. Design of engineered materials through selecting constituents & processing techniques and the influence on mechanical properties, microstructure, and environmental impacts. Role of materials in the environmental impacts of buildings, infrastructure, and other systems.
Quality requirements for beneficial uses of water. Hydrologic cycle of quality. Hydromechanics in relation to quality of surface and groundwaters; transport and fate of waterborne pollutants. Heatbudget for surface waters; predictive methods; introduction to water quality modeling.
Modeling of reactive chemical transport in air and water including kinetic reactions, equilibrium reactions, and phase partitioning. Emphasis on numerical solution schemes and programming techniques to provide deeper insight into model performance and limitations.
Factors determining air quality. Effects of air pollutants. Physical and chemical fundamentals of atmospheric transport and reaction. Introduction to dispersion modeling.  
Characteristics of water and airborne wastes; treatment processes and process kinetics; treatment system design.
Continuation of ECI 243A. Aeration, thickening, biological processes, design of biological treatment systems.
Laboratory investigation of physical, chemical, and biological processes for water and wastewater treatment.
Chemistry of natural and polluted waters. Topics include chemical, kinetic and equilibrium principles, redox reactions, gas solution and solid-solution equilibria, thermodynamics, carbonate systems, coordination chemistry, interfacial phenomena.
Transport and transformation of organic chemicals in the environment.Topics include application of thermodynamics to predict solubility and activity coefficients; distribution of organic chemicals between the aqueous phase and air, solvent, or solid phases; chemical, photochemical and biological transformation reactions.
Behavior of airborne particles including particle formation, modification, and removal processes.  
Methods of generation and characterization of aerosols. Detailed topics may include flow rate measurement, aerosol generation, aerosol collection, ions measurement, metals measurement, and carbon measurement.
Natural and engineered biofilms, including biofilm occurrence and development, spatial structure, microbial processes, fundamental and applied research tools, biofilm reactors, beneficial uses, and detrimental effects.
Design by optimization for probabilistic systems, decision theory, the value of information, probabilistic linear programming, probabilistic dynamic programming, nonlinear probabilistic optimization. Applications in civil engineering design, project evaluation, and risk management.
Applied mathematics with a focus on modeling, identifying, and controlling dynamic, stochastic, and underdetermined systems. Applications in transportation networks, water resource planning, and other civil infrastructure systems. 
Procedures used in urban travel demand forecasting. Principles and assumptions of model components (trip generation, trip distribution, model split). New methods of estimating travel demand. Computer exercises using empirical data to calibrate models and forecast travel demand.
Operations research. Optimization techniques with a focus on dynamic programming in treating deterministic, stochastic, and adaptive multistage decision processes. Brief review of linear programming and non-linear programming. Applications in transportation networks and other civil infrastructure systems.
Basic concepts, models, and methods related to the branch of traffic science that deals with the movement of vehicles on a road network, including travel speed, travel time, congestion concepts, car-following and hydrodynamic traffic models.
Elements of graph theory, a survey of pertinent optimization techniques, extremal principles in network flow problems, deterministic equilibrium assignment, stochastic equilibrium assignment, extensions of equilibrium assignments and dynamic transportation network assignment.
Asphalts and asphalt mix types and their use in civil engineering structures, with primary emphasis on pavements. Asphalt, aggregate properties and effects on mix properties. Design, construction, recycling. Recent developments and research.
Sediment transport in hydrologic systems. Process-oriented course which will emphasize how sediment moves and the physical processes that affect sediment transport. Field trip.
Colloid occurrence, properties, behavior in different environments, and transport mechanisms in water and soils. Emphasis on their role in water contamination.
Principal causes of mixing and transport in rivers, lakes and reservoirs, and their impacts on water quality. Case studies of specific lakes and rivers.
Principal causes of mixing and transport in estuaries and wetlands, and their impacts on water quality. Topics include advection/diffusion; tides; transverse mixing; longitudinal dispersion; sediment transport; nutrient cycling; computer modeling of estuaries. Case studies of specific systems.
Physics-based stochastic methods in modeling hydrologic and hydraulic processes; theory for modeling hydrologic-hydraulic governing equations as stochastic partial differential equations applied to various hydrologic-hydraulic processes under uncertainty, including transport, open channel flow, overland flow, soil water flow, and groundwater.
Stochastic processes classification; Gaussian random fields; stochastic calculus in mean square; Ito and Stratonovich stochastic differential equations; Fokker-Planck equation; stochastic differential equationswith random coefficients.
Engineering, institutional, economic, and social basis for managing local and regional water resources. Examples in the context of California's water development and management. Uses of computer modeling to improve water management.
Economics applied to infrastructure engineering  planning, operations, maintenance, and management problems; microeconomic and macroeconomic theories; benefit-cost analysis; effect of uncertainty; optimization economics; non-classical economics; public finance.
Health and regulatory aspects of airborne pollutants. Principles of modeling vehicle emissions. Conformity issues and the regulatory framework. Regional and micro-scale modeling.
Discussion of technical papers related to planning theory, system maintenance, regionalization, multi-objective methods, risk analysis, institutional issues, pricing model application, economic development, forecasting, operations, and other topics.
Inverse calibration of distributed parameter models, using data representing model outputs. Forward and inverse mappings, stability, uniqueness, identifiability. Optimization formulation of inverse problems, maximum likelihood and other objective functions, indirect and direct approaches, solution by UCODE in hands-on project format.
Flow in confined, unconfined, and leaky aquifers.  Geological aspects of aquifers.  Regional groundwater flow and hydraulics of pumping and recharging wells.  Identification of aquifer parameters.  Isotope hydrogeology and recharge estimation.
Processes of subsurface flows and transport. Numerical methods of subsurface fluid flow and transport systems.  Flow in the unsaturated zone.  Fresh water-salt water interface in coastal aquifers.  Macrodispersion. Identification of regional aquifer parameters.  Modeling of aquifer systems.
Multicomponent reactive transport including multiple phases.  Advective/dispersive transport, chemical equilibria, and mass transformation kinetics.  Natural chemical/microbiological processes including sorption, complexation, biodegradation, and diffusive mass transfer.  Eulerian and Lagrangean averaging methods.  Applications to contaminant remediation problems in river and subsurface hydrology.
Planning and management of water resource systems. Deterministic and stochastic simulation and optimization techniques. Capacity design and operation of reservoir systems for water supply, hydropower, flood control, and environmental objectives.
Application of statistical methods for analysis and modeling of hydrologic series.  Statistical simulation and prediction of hydrologic sequences using time series methodology.
Analysis and mathematical modeling of hydrologic processes taking place in a watershed. Precipitation analysis and modeling. Theory of overland flow and its kinematic wave approximation.Analysis and modeling of saturated and unsaturated subsurface flow processes taking place on a hill slope.
Unsteady open channel flows, computation of water surface profiles, shallow water equations, St. Venant equations, method of characteristics, finite difference methods, stability and accuracy of explicit and implicit schemes, flood routing in simple and compound channels, advection of plumes.
Open channel flows, physical aspects of river mechanics, formulation of depth-averaged equations, boundary conditions, coordinates transformation and grid generation, finite-difference solution techniques, applications to two-dimensional momentum and pollutant transport in rivers.
Nature of turbulent flows, conservation equations, momentum, heat and mass transport in free and wall-bounded flows, body forces and mixing, roughness effects, turbulence modeling and simulation.
Perturbation methods. Basic water waves. Governing equations for fluid motion on a rotating earth. Rotation effects, vorticity dynamics, Ekman layer. Stratification effects, internal waves and turbulent mixing. Combined effects.
Rotational flows. Navier-Stokes equations and solutions for laminar flow; boundary layer equations and solution techniques. Nature of turbulence. Reynolds equations. Introduction to turbulence modeling.
State of the art finite element methods and tools for elasticplastic problems, including computational techniques based on the finite element method and the theory of elastoplasticity.
State of the art computational methods and tools for analyzing linear and nonlinear dynamics problems.
Consolidation and secondary compression. Preloading and wick drains.  Seepage and seepage pressures. Filtration, drainage, and dewatering. Shear strength: friction, cohesion, dilatancy and critical states.
Site investigation and soil characterization within the context of slope stability analysis.
Advanced pavement design and structural/functional condition evaluation for concrete and asphalt pavements. Highways, airfields, port facilities; new facilities, rehabilitation, reconstruction. Mechanistic-empirical procedures, materials, climate and traffic characterization. Use of current design methods; recent developments and research.
Study of the geotechnical behavior of soils considering formation, transport, mineralogy, soil-fluid-electrolyte systems, surface tension, particle mechanics, shape, fabric, and structure.  Laboratories demonstrate effects of fundamental interparticle forces (contact, Van Der Waals, capillarity and chemical). 
Elasticity, plasticity, micromechanics, coupled behavior and large deformations for geomaterials. Prediction of stress-strain-volume change behavior of geomaterials. Monotonic and cyclic loading, anisotropy, bifurcation of deformation. 
Design and analysis of pile and pier foundations, including seismic effects; deep excavation systems; tie-back, nailing, and anchor systems; coffer dams; loads on buried conduits; ground modification techniques; and other related topics.
Characteristics and estimation of earthquake ground motions; wave propagation and local site response; liquefaction potential and remediation; residual strength and stability considerations; ground deformations; dynamic soil-structure interaction.
Site selection; design considerations; layout; seismic effects including considerations of fault movements; construction; environmental considerations, instrumentation; maintenance remediation and retrofit of existing dams.
Directed group study in Environmental Engineering.
Directed group study in Hydraulics & Hydrologic Engineering.
Directed group study in Engineering Planning.
Directed group study in Geotechnical Engineering.
Directed group study in Structural Engineering.
Directed group study in Structural Mechanics.
Directed group study in Transportation Engineering.
Directed group study in Transportation Planning.
Directed group study in Water Resources Engineering.

Participation as teaching assistant or associate-in in a designated engineering course. Methods of leading discussion groups or laboratory sections, writing and grading quizzes, use of laboratory equipment, and grading laboratory reports.
Covers principles of community structure and functioning, species diversity patterns, ecosystem ecology and biogeochemistry, landscape ecology, biogeography and phylogenetics.
Provides a broad background in the principles and applications of ecology, and serves as a foundation for advanced ecology courses. Topics include ecophysiology, behavioral ecology, population ecology, genetics and evolution. Emphasis on historical developments, current understanding, and real world applications.
Comparative examination of several animal groups addressing fundamental physiological mechanisms that shape the ecology of each animal group.
Comparative examination of several animal groups addressing fundamental physiological mechanisms that shape the ecology of each animal group.
Introduction to literature and contemporary research into processes structuring ecological communities.
Principles and techniques of vegetation analysis, including structure, composition, and dynamics. Emphasis given to sampling procedures, association analysis, ordination, processes and mechanisms of succession, and classification. Most techniques are demonstrated or conducted during field trips and laboratories.
Introduction to theoretical and empirical research in plant population biology. Emphasis placed on linking ecological ecological and genetic approaches to plant population biology.
Graduate-level introduction to current research in conservation biology. Emphasizes reading and discussing primary literature. Specific topics will reflect the research interests of UC Davis conservation biology faculty.
Principles drawn from social science, ecology and evolution to study of human populations and behavior, emphasizing environmental/resource issues. These principles form a synthetic framework that articulates elements drawn from the social sciences as well as biology.
Principles drawn from social science, ecology and evolution to study of human populations and behavior, emphasizing environmental/resource issues. These principles form a synthetic framework that articulates elements drawn from the social sciences as well as biology.
Introduction to selected topics of the policy process and applications to the field of environmental policy. Develops critical reading skills, understanding of policy theory, and an ability to apply multiple theories to the same phenomena.
Method and practice, philosophical basis, and political role of policy analysis. Reviews basic concepts from economic theory; how and why environmental problems emerge in a market economy; and tools necessary for solving environmental problems. 
Critical review and analysis of concepts and practices in modern marine ecology at the interface of several fields of study including oceanography, evolution, behavior, and physiology. Emphasis on critical thinking, problem solving, and hands-on study. Two field trips required. 
Overview of social-ecological systems that links environmental policy and decision-making to ecological processes. Delves deeper into different social science topics related to this broader idea. Applying of course readings to case studies chosen by students and a final paper. 
Ecological principles as relevant to agriculture. Integration of ecological approaches into agricultural research to increase ecosystem functions and services. Topics include crop autoecology, biotic interactions among crops and pests, ecosystem and landscape ecology.
Multi-disciplinary analysis of energy and nutrient transfers within terrestrial ecosystems. Examination of processes and inter- and intra-system interactions between the atmosphere, biosphere, lithosphere, and hydrosphere. Laboratory section uses biogeochemical simulation models to examine case studies.
Field course conducted over spring break and four weekends at Bodega Bay, emphasizing student projects. Ecological hypothesis testing, data gathering, analysis, and written and oral presentation of results are stressed.
Mathematical methods used in population biology. Linear and nonlinear difference equation and differential equation models are studied, using stability analysis and qualitative methods. Partial differential equation models are introduced. Applications to population biology models are stressed.
Numerical methods for simulating population dynamics using the computational software package R. Emphasis placed on model formulation and development, theoretical concepts and philosophical principles to guide simulation efforts, model parameterization, and implementing simulations with R.
Introduction to the field of applied ecological genetics to include applications in conservation ecology, population genetics, population biology, wildlife health and disease ecology.
Genomics concepts, technologies, and analyses for ecology research. Mixture of lecture, discussion of recent literature, hands-on training in data analysis and experimental design, and research proposal preparation and evaluation. One all-day field trip is required.
Logical basis for population models, evaluation of simple ecological models, current population models with age, size, and stage structure, theoretical basis for management and exemplary case histories. Emphasis on development and use of realistic population models in ecological research.
Critical presentation and evaluation of current literature and ongoing research in ecology. Requirements include active participation in weekly discussions and the presentation of a paper or chapter once per quarter.
Reading and offering workshop critiques of manuscripts submitted for publication, and reading and discussion of other relevant work in anthropology and human ecology. Track and edit published comments and authors replies that accompany major features. Participation in the development of new sections for the electronic edition of the journal, including a "news and views" section and a debate section. 
Topics in ecology. Students are expected to present an oral seminar on a particular aspect of the general topic under consideration.
Seminars presented by visiting lecturers, UC Davis faculty, and graduate students.
Teaching ecology including conducting discussion groups for regular departmental courses under direct guidance of staff.

Examination of a special topic in Economics through shared readings,discussions, and written assignments.
Intensive study of practical application of concepts in economics, stressing research methods and empirical analysis.
Primarily for lower division students.

Price and distribution theory under conditions of perfect and imperfect competition. General equilibrium and welfare economics.
Price and distribution theory under conditions of perfect and imperfect competition. General equilibrium and welfare economics.
Consumer and producer theory. Equilibrium and welfare analysis. Topics include competitive markets, consumer and producer surplus at an intermediate level.
Imperfect competition and market failure. Topics include exchange, monopoly, game theory, uncertainty, asymmetric information, and public goods.
Theory of income, employment and prices under static and dynamic conditions, and long term growth.
Analysis of economic data to investigate key relationships emphasized in introductory micro and macro economics. Obtaining, transforming, displaying data; statistical analysis of economic data; basic univariate and multivariate regression analysis.
Optimal decisions under uncertainty, expected utility theory, economics of insurance, asymmetric information, signalling in the job market, incentives and Principal-Agent theory, optimal search strategies and the reservation price principle.
Descriptive and normative analysis of individual decision making, with applications to personal, professional, financial, and public policy decisions. Emphasis on decision making under uncertainty and over time. Heuristics and biases in the psychology of decisions; overcoming decision traps. 
Theoretical and empirical approaches to neuroeconomics (neuroscience of decision making) from psychology, neuroscience, economics, and computer science. Neuroscience of judgment and decision making, behavioral economics, and reinforcement learning.
Development and application of analytical models to explain the nature and functioning of economies before the Industrial Revolution. Examples will be drawn from a variety of societies, including England, China, Polynesia, and Pre-Columbian America.
Development and application of analytical models to explain the nature and functioning of economies since the Industrial Revolution.  Examples will be drawn from a variety of societies, including England, China, Germany, and India.
Survey of economic change in the United States from Colonial times to 1865; reference to other regions in the Western Hemisphere.
Survey of economic change in the United States from 1865 to the post World War II era.
Major issues encountered in emerging from international poverty, including problems of growth and structural change, human welfare,population growth and health, labor markets and internal migration. Important issues of policy concerning international trade and industrialization.
Major macroeconomic issues of developing countries. Issues include problems in generating capital, conduct of monetary and fiscalpolicies, foreign aid and investment. Important issues of policy concerning international borrowing and external debt of developing countries.
Major macroeconomic issues of developing countries. Issues include problems in generating capital, conduct of monetary and fiscalpolicies, foreign aid and investment. Important issues of policy concerning international borrowing and external debt of developing countries.
Economics analysis of the relative virtues of capitalism and socialism, including welfare economics.  Marxian exploitation theory, the socialist  calculation debate (Hayek and Lange), alternative capitalist systems (Japan, Germany, U.S.) and contemporary models of market socialism.
Introduction to research on the economics of immigration. Immigrant demographics and reasons for migrating. Immigrant success and effects on native populations. Influence of immigrants on those left behind. Discussion of migration policy in the US and other countries.
Appraisal of the role of competition and monopoly in the American economy; market structure, conduct, and economic performance of a variety of industries.
Study of antitrust and economic regulation. Emphasis on applying theoretical models to U.S. industries and case studies, including telecommunications, software, and electricity markets. Topics include natural monopoly, optimal and actual regulatory mechanisms, deregulation, mergers, predatory pricing, and monopolization.
Introduction to game theory. Explanation of the behavior of rational individuals with interacting and often conflicting interests. Non-cooperative and cooperative theory. Applications to economics, political science and other fields.
Application of theoretical and empirical models to examine efficiency in energy production and use. Energy and environmental policy, market structure and power, global climate change, optimal regulation, and real-world applications; e.g., California electricity crisis. 
Application of theoretical and empirical models to examine efficiency in energy production and use. Energy and environmental policy, market structure and power, global climate change, optimal regulation, and real-world applications; e.g., California electricity crisis. 
Public expenditures; theory and applications. Efficiency and equity of competitive markets; externalities, public goods, and market failures; positive and normative aspects of public policy for expenditure, including benefit-cost analysis. Topics include consumer protection, pollution, education, poverty and crime.
Economic burden of taxation; equity and efficiency considerations in tax design; structure and economic effects of the U.S. tax system (including personal income tax, corporation income tax, and property tax); tax loopholes; recent developments; tax reform proposals.
The health care market, emphasizing the role and use of economics. Individual demand, provision of services by doctors and hospitals, health insurance, managed care and competition, the role of government access to health care.
Examination of the economics of poverty and inequality in the United States, including measurement, trends, and related policies.
General background and rationale of corporation; finance as resource allocation over time; decision making under uncertainty and the role of information; capital market and interest rate structure; financial decisions.  
General background and rationale of corporation; finance as resource allocation over time; decision making under uncertainty and the role of information; capital market and interest rate structure; financial decisions.  
General background and rationale of corporation; finance as resource allocation over time; decision making under uncertainty and the role of information; capital market and interest rate structure; financial decisions.  
Banks and the banking system. Uncertainty and asymmetric information in the lending process; efficiency of competitive equilibrium in lending markets. Regulation and the conduct of monetary policy.
Advanced Topics in macroeconomics theory. Develops the theoretical and empirical analysis of a specific field of macroeconomics. Possible topics include, business cycle theories, growth theory, monetary economics, political economics and theories of unemployment and inflation.
Theory and practice of macroeconomic policy, both monetary and fiscal.
Problems of observation, estimation and hypotheses testing in economics through the study of the theory and application of linear regression models. Critical evaluation of selected examples of empirical research and exercises in applied economics.
Problems of observation, estimation and hypotheses testing in economics through the study of the theory and application of linear regression models. Critical evaluation of selected examples of empirical research and exercises in applied economics.
Examination of fundamental problems of planning and financing transportation "infrastructure" (roads, ports, airports). The economics of the automobile industry, as well as the impact of government regulation and deregulation in the airlines and trucking industries.
Examination of fundamental problems of planning and financing transportation "infrastructure" (roads, ports, airports). The economics of the automobile industry, as well as the impact of government regulation and deregulation in the airlines and trucking industries. Intended for advanced Economics undergraduates. 
Theory of labor supply and demand; determination of wages and employment in the labor market. Policy issues:  labor force participation by married women; minimum wages and youth unemployment; effect of unions on wages.
Human resource analysis; introduction to human capital theory and economics of education; the basic theory of wage differentials, including theories of labor market discrimination; income distribution; poverty. Policy issues; negative income tax; manpower training programs; incomes policy.
Application of theoretical and empirical tools of economics to the education sector. Demand for Education; Education Production and Market Structures in Education. Policy applications: class size reduction, school finance equalization, accountability, and school choice.
International grade theory: impact of trade on the domestic and world economies; public policy toward external trade.
Macroeconomic theory of an open economy. Balance of payments adjustment mechanism, international monetary economics issues; international financial institutions and their policies.
International trade & monetary relations, trade policy, exchange rate policy, policies toward international capital migration and investment. Emphasis on current policy issues. Intended especially for non-majors. 
Barriers to economic development in developing countries. Economic and policy tools to address barriers within a functioning, well-intentioned government and non-functioning or ill-intentioned governments. Conflict between the state and other subnational actors for legitimate political control. Field experiments and other methodology to understand the success of economic and policy tools in weak states
Intensive reading, discussion and research on selected topics from the economies of the countries of East Asia. Consult department for course scheduling.
Selected topics in economic analysis and public policy.  Variable content. 
In-depth examination at an upper division level of a special topic in Economics. Emphasis on focused analytical work. May not be repeated for credit.
Internship experience off and on campus in all subject areas offered in the Department of Economics. Supervised by a member of the staff.
A program of research culminating in the writing of a senior honors thesis under the direction of a faculty advisor.
A program of research culminating in the writing of a senior honors thesis under the direction of a faculty advisor.
Undergraduates assist the instructor by tutoring students in one of the department's regularly scheduled courses.  


Linear and non-linear optimization theory applied to develop the theory of the profit-maximizing firm and the utility-maximizing consumer.
Characteristics of market equilibrium under perfect competition, simple monopoly and monopsony. Emphasis on general equilibrium and welfare economics; the sources of market success and market failure.
Uncertainty and information economics. Individual decision making under uncertainty. Introduction to game theory, with emphasis on applications to markets with firms that are imperfect competitors or consumers that are imperfectly informed.
Macro static theory of income, employment, and prices.
Macrodynamic theory of income, employment, and prices.
Advanced topics in general equilibrium theory and welfare economics: existence, determinateness and efficiency; intertemporal economies; uncertainty.
Covers the most recent developments in game theory, with the focus changing from year to year. Main topics are: refinements Nash equilibrium, repeated games, evolution, social situations, bounded rationality, and bargaining theory.
Selected topics in contemporary microeconomic theory.
Selected topics and issues, emphasis on current research. (Quarter offered to be flexible.)
Review of the principal theoretical and empirical issues whose analysis has formed development economics. Analysis of economic development theories and development strategies and their application to specificpolicy issues in developing country contexts.
Agricultural development theory, with a focus on microeconomics. Agricultural household behavior with and without market imperfections and uncertainty. Analysis of rural land, labor, credit and insurance markets, institutions, and contracts.
Models and policy approaches regarding trade, monetary and fiscal issues, capital flows and debt are discussed in the macroeconomic framework of an open developing country. Basic analytical focus is real exchange rate and its impact on sectoral allocation of resources.
Extension of development theory and microeconomic methods. Agricultural growth and technological change; poverty and income inequality; multisectoral, including village and regional models. Computable general equilibrium methods and applications.
Interdisciplinary course drawing on theoretical and empirical research on interactions between environmental resource use and economic development processes. Analysis of issues emerging at the interface of environmental and development economics.
Fundamentals of energy technology, economics, and policy. Survey and analysis of current and prospective climate policies at the local and global level, including but not limited to cap-and-trade, emissions offsets, intensity standards, technology standards, mandates and subsidies.
Game theory is used to analyze strategic interaction of firms in industries. Topics include models of competition, product differentiation, entry-deterring strategies, contractual arrangements, vertical control and antitrust issues.
Recent empirical work in industrial organization.  Topics include empirical analysis of cartels, product differentiation, innovation and technological change, and imperfect competition in international markets.
Optimal regulation of natural monopoly. Topics include regulatory mechanisms for single and multiple output firms under symmetric and asymmetric information, optimality without regulation, the economic theory of regulation, and empirical studies of regulation and deregulation.
Measures of deadweight loss and consumer surplus; optimal commodity and income taxation; tax incidence; policy issues in personal taxation, corporate taxation, and social insurance; the evaluation of effective tax rates.
Effects of government policies on economic behavior; labor supply, program participation, investment, consumption and savings.
Advanced topics in economics of the public sector, with emphasis on current research. Topics differ from year to year.
Frontiers of applied/empirical macroeconomics. Evidence and lessons from macroeconomic history for The Great Depression, financial crises, efficient markets, parity conditions, capital flows, default, financial crises, exchange rates, growth, and other current empirical research topics.
Search theory, theory of real-world markets characterized by search frictions, with applications: Labor economics: models of unemployment and wages differentials; Financial economics: determination of asset prices in OTC financial markets; Monetary Economics: foundations for money as a medium of exchange.
Basic numerical methods for analytically intractable problems in economics. Techniques presented applicable in a wide range of fields including macroeconomics, econometrics, resource economics, labor economics, economic theory, international trade, finance, game theory, public finance, contract theory, and others.
Prepares students for econometric theory and empirical work by examining the statistical foundation of econometrics. Special attention is paid to problems specific to non-experimental data common to social sciences. Topics from matrix algebra are also covered.
Least squares, instrumental variables, and maximum likelihood estimation and inference for single equation linear regression model; linear restrictions; heteroskedasticity; autocorrelation; lagged dependent variables.
Topics include asymptotic theory and instrumental variables, pooled time-series cross-section estimation, seemingly unrelated regression, classical hypothesis tests, identification and estimation of simultaneous equation models, cointegration, errorcorrection models, and qualitative and limited dependent variable models.
Probability theory; estimation, inference and forecasting of time series models; trends and non-standard asymptotic theory; vector time series methods and cointegration; time series models for higher order moments and transition data; state-space modeling and the Kalman filter. 
Estimation and inference for nonlinear regression models for cross-section data; models for discrete data and for limited dependent variables; models for panel data; additional topics such as bootstrap and semiparametric regression.
Modern econometric techniques for time series data. Expand on topics covered in ECN 240A, ECN 240B, ECN 240C. Content may differ year to year.
Modern econometrics techniques for cross-section data. Expand on topics covered in ECN 240A, ECN 240B, ECN 240D. Content may differ year to year.
Philosophy, theory and history of American and foreign labor movements; union structure, organization and collective bargaining under changing labor market conditions; current labor market issues.
Microeconomic theory of labor supply and labor demand, estimation of labor supply and demand functions; human capital theory; labor market analysis.
Theory of trade determinants; gains from trade; tariffs and effective protection; economic unions.
Balance of payments adjustment mechanisms; foreign exchange marketstheories of balance of payments policy and international monetary mechanisms.
Analysis of foreign investment and its links to trade; theories of the firm as they relate to firm's export and investment decisions; and an introduction to the political economy of trade policies.
Survey of current literature in international macroeconomic theory.
Current literature in international trade theory.
Theory and practice of international macroeconomic policy. Topics include exchange rate regimes, international financial institutions, crises and current topics.
Modern theories and empirics of economic growth beginning with the neoclassical theories up to current endogenous growth models. Emphasis on the analysis of human capital and growth, technological innovation, its diffusion and  empirical evidence on growth.
Empirical analysis of growth patterns and growth models. Emphasis on the relationship between macroeconomic management and long-term growth; the use of foreign capital in accelerating growth and its occasional mishaps; the comparison of growth performance in East Asia and Latin America since WW2; the experiences of centrally-planned economies and transitions to market-based growth; and the transformation from an industrial economy to a knowledge economy. 
Institutional bases; politics; contracts and commitment; money and finance; malthusian dynamics; modern economic growth; transition of industrialization; dual economies, core and periphery; sources of convergence and divergence; openness and growth; resources, demography, and geography; institutions, imperialism, and class conflicts.
Selected topics in economic analysis and public policy, focusing on current research.
Seminar series on topics of current interest.  


Teaching of economics: methods of instruction, organization of courses, examination and evaluation procedures.
Discrete mathematics of particular utility to computer science. Proofs by induction. Propositional and first-order logic. Sets, functions, and relations. Big-O and related notations. Recursion and solutions of recurrence relations. Combinatorics. Probability on finite probability spaces. Graph theory.
Design and analysis of data structures using Python; trees, heaps, searching, sorting, and graphs. 
UNIX Operating system tools and programming environment. Methods for debugging and verification. Principles of C and object-oriented programming in C++. Extensive programming.  
Computers and computer programming for students with some prior experience, algorithm design, and debugging. Good programming style. Use of basic UNIX tools. 
Computers and computer programming for students with some prior experience, algorithm design, and debugging. Good programming style. Use of basic UNIX tools. 
Computers and computer programming for students with some prior experience, algorithm design, and debugging. Good programming style. Use of basic UNIX tools. 
Object-oriented programming in C++. Basic data structures and their use. Writing good programs of increased complexity and efficiency. Methods for debugging and verification.  
Design and analysis of data structures for a variety of applications; trees, heaps, searching, sorting, hashing, and graphs. Extensive programming. 
Comparative study of different hardware architectures via programming in the assembly languages of various machines. Role of system software in producing an abstract machine. Introduction to I/O devices and programming.
Comparative study of different hardware architectures via programming in the assembly languages of various machines. Role of system software in producing an abstract machine. Introduction to I/O devices and programming.
Special topics in Computer Science Theory.
Special topics in Architecture.
Special topics in Programming Languages & Compilers.
Special topics in Operating Systems.
Special topics in Software Engineering.
Special topics in Databases.
Special topics in Artificial Intelligence.
Special topics in Computer Graphics.
Special topics in Networks.
Special topics in Computer-Aided Design.
Special topics in Scientific Computing.
Special topics in Computer Science.
Supervised work experience in computer science.
Student facilitated course intended primarily for lower division students.

Principles, mechanisms, implementation, and sound practices of computer security and data protection. Cryptography, authentication and access control. Internet security. Malicious software. Common vulnerabilities. Practical security in everyday life. Not intended for Computer Science or Computer Science & Engineering majors.
Fundamental ideas in the theory of computation, including formal languages, computability and complexity. Reducibility among computational problems.
Complexity of algorithms, bounds on complexity, analysis methods. Searching, sorting, pattern matching, graph algorithms. Algorithm design techniques: divide-conquer, greedy, dynamic programming. Approximation methods. NP-complete problems.
Theory and practice of hard problems, and problems with complex algorithm solutions. NP-completeness, approximation algorithms, randomized algorithms, dynamic programming and branch and bound. Theoretical analysis, implementation and practical evaluations. Examples from parallel, string, graph, and geometric algorithms.
Fundamental biological, mathematical and algorithmic models underlying bioinformatics and systems biology; sequence analysis, database search, genome annotation, clustering and classification, functional gene networks, regulatory network inference, phylogenetic trees, applications of common bioinformatics tools in molecular biology and genetics.
Introduction to the theory and practice of cryptographic techniques used in computer security. Encryption (secret-key and public-key), message authentication, digital signatures, entity authentication, key distribution, and other cryptographic protocols. The social context of cryptography.
Fundamental biological, chemical and algorithmic models underlying computational structural biology; protein structure and nucleic acids structure; comparison of protein structures; protein structure prediction; molecular simulations; databases and online services in computational structural biology.
Matrix-vector approach using MATLAB for floating-point arithmetic, error analysis, data interpolation, least squares data fitting, quadrature, zeros, optimization and matrix eigenvalues and singular values. Parallel computing for matrix operations and essential matrix factorizations.
Univariate and multivariate distributions. Estimation and model building. Markov/Hidden Markov models. Applications to data mining, networks, security, software engineering and bioinformatics.
Univariate and multivariate distributions. Estimation and model building. Markov/Hidden Markov models. Applications to data mining, networks, security, software engineering and bioinformatics.
Syntactic definition of programming languages. Introduction to programming language features including variables, data types, data abstraction, object-orientedness, scoping, parameter disciplines, exception handling. Non-imperative programming languages. Comparative study of several high-level programming languages.
Syntactic definition of programming languages. Introduction to programming language features including variables, data types, data abstraction, object-orientedness, scoping, parameter disciplines, exception handling. Non-imperative programming languages. Comparative study of several high-level programming languages.
Continuation of programming language principles. Further study of programming language paradigms such as functional and logic; additional programming language paradigms such as concurrent (parallel); key implementation issues for those paradigms; and programming language semantics.
Principles and techniques of lexical analysis, parsing, semantic analysis, code generation, and code optimization. Implementation of compilers. 
Goals and philosophy of scripting languages, with Python and R as prime examples. Applications include networking, data analysis and display, and graphical user interfaces (GUIs).
Basic concepts of operating systems and system programming. Processes and interprocess communication/synchronization; virtual memory, program loading and linking; file and I/O subsystems; utility programs. Study of a real operating system.
Overview of computer networks, TCP/IP protocol suite, computer-networking applications and protocols, transport-layer protocols, network architectures, Internet Protocol (IP), routing, link-layer protocols, local area and wireless networks, medium access control, physical aspects of data transmission, and network-performance analysis. 
TCP/IP protocol suite, computer networking applications, client-server and peer-to-peer architectures, application-layer protocols, transport-layer protocols, transport-layer interfaces, sockets, network programming, remote procedure calls, and network management.
Advanced topics in computer networks, wireless networks, multimedia networking, traffic analysis and modeling,  network design and management, network simulation and performance analysis, and design projects in communication networks. 
Principles, mechanisms, and implementation of computer security and data protection. Policy, encryption and authentication, access control, and integrity models and mechanisms; network security; secure systems; programming and vulnerabilities analysis. Study of an existing operating system.
Introduction to digital design. Interfacing of devices for I/O, memory and memory management. Input/output programming, via wait loops, hardware interrupts and calls to operating system services. Hardware support for operating systems software.
Hardwired and microprogrammed CPU design. Memory hierarchies. Uniprocessor performance analysis under varying program mixes. Introduction to pipelining and multiprocessors.
Techniques for software development using the shared-memory and message-passing paradigms, on parallel architectures and networks of workstations. Locks, barriers, and other techniques for synchronization. Introduction to parallel algorithms.
Requirements, specification, design, implementation, testing, and verification of large software systems. Study and use of software engineering methodologies. Team programming.
Concepts and practice of collaborative software development using modern software tools. 
Technical aspects of building websites, including both server-side and client-side software development.  
Art and science of information visualization and interfaces for information systems. Design principles of human-computer interaction. Visual display and navigation of nonspatial and higher dimensional data. Implementations, performance issues, tradeoffs, and evaluation of interactive information systems.
Database modeling and design (E/R model, relational model), relational algebra, query languages (SQL), file and index structures, query processing, transaction management.
Data modeling (object-relational, graph-based, spatiotemporal models). Querying semistructured data (XML). Database theory (normalization, integration, provenance). Database programming (stored procedures, embedded SQL, web programming). Advanced topics (data warehousing, parallel data processing).
Design and implementation of intelligent computer systems. Knowledge representation and organization. Memory and inference. Problem solving. Natural language processing.
Design and implementation of intelligent computer systems. Knowledge representation and organization. Memory and inference. Problem solving. Natural language processing.
Introduction to machine learning. Supervised and unsupervised learning, including classification, dimensionality reduction, regression and clustering using modern machine learning methods. Applications of machine learning to other fields.
Introduction to machine learning. Supervised & unsupervised learning, including classification, dimensionality reduction, regression & clustering using modern machine learning methods. Applications of machine learning to other fields.
Techniques for automated extraction of high-level information from images generated by cameras, three-dimensional surface sensors, and medical devices. Typical applications include detection of objects in various types of images and describing populations of biological specimens appearing in medical imagery.
Computer vision is the study of enabling machines to "see" the visual world; e.g., understand images and videos. Explores several fundamental topics in the area, including feature detection, grouping and segmentation, and recognition. 
Principles of computer graphics, with a focus on interactive systems. Current graphics hardware, elementary operations in two-and three-dimensional space, geometric transformations, camera models and interaction, graphics system design, standard graphics APIs, individual projects.
Computer graphics techniques for generating images of various types of measured or computer-simulated data. Typical applications for these graphics techniques include study of air flows around car bodies, medical data, and molecular structures.    
Interactive graphics techniques for defining and manipulating geometrical shapes used in computer animation, car body design, aircraft design, and architectural design.
Foundations of ethics. Views of technology. Technology and human values. Costs and benefits of technology. Character of technological change. Social context of work in computer science and engineering.
Special topic in Computer Science Theory.
Special topic in Architecture.
Special topic in Programming Languages & Compilers.
Special topic in Operating Systems.
Special topic in Software Engineering
Special topic Databases.
Special topic in Artificial Intelligence.
Special topic in Artificial Intelligence.
Special topic in Computer Graphics.
Special topic in Networks.
Special topic in Computer-Aided Design.
Special topic in Scientific Computing.
Special topic in Computer Science.
Special topics in Computer Security.
Special topics in Bioinformatics & Computational Biology.
Research group conferences.
Examination of a special topic in a small group setting.
Supervised work experience in computer science.
Responding to real-life client design challenges, student teams plan, implement, and evaluate large-scale projects involving computer and computational systems. Project supervised by a faculty member. Must take ECS 193A & ECS 193B to receive credit.
Responding to real-life client design challenges, student teams plan, implement, and evaluate large-scale projects involving computer and computational systems. Project supervised by a faculty member. Must take ECS 193A & ECS 193B to receive credit.
Tutoring in computer science courses, especially introductory courses.

Student facilitated course intended primarily for upper division students.
STU FAC. Under the supervision of a faculty member, an undergraduate student teaches a course under 098F/198F.
Modern research topics and methods in computer architecture. Design implications of memory latency and bandwidth limitations. Performance enhancement via within-processor and between-processor  parallelism. Term project involving student-proposed extensions/modifications of work in the research  literature.
Modern research topics and methods in computer architecture. Design implications of memory latency and bandwidth limitations. Performance enhancement via within-processor and between-processor parallelism. 
Maximizing uniprocessor performance. Barriers to high performance; solutions to the problems; historical and current processor designs.
Maximizing uniprocessor performance. Barriers to high performance; solutions to the problems; historical and current processor designs.
Evolution of parallel architectures from special-purpose machines to commodity servers. Emphasis on recent machines and applications that drive them.  
Evolution of parallel architectures from special-purpose machines to commodity servers. Emphasis on recent machines and applications that drive them.  
Novel computing technologies that could revolutionize computer architecture. Quantum computing technologies, including algorithms, devices, and fault tolerance. A survey of other unconventional technologies including nanoscale electronics, MEMS devices, biological devices, and nanotechnology. 
Novel computing technologies that could revolutionize computer architecture. Quantum computing technologies, including algorithms, devices, and fault tolerance. A survey of other unconventional technologies including nanoscale electronics, MEMS devices, biological devices, and nanotechnology. 
Time and space complexity classes. Reductions, completeness, and the role of randomness. Logic and undecidability.
Time and space complexity classes. Reductions, completeness, and the role of randomness. Logic and undecidability.
Techniques for designing efficient algorithms, analyzing their complexity and applying these algorithms to a broad range of applications. Methods for recognizing and dealing with difficult problems. 
Advanced topics in complexity theory. Problem classification. The classes P, NP, P-space, co-NP. Matching and network flow algorithms. Matrix multiplication. Approximation algorithms.
Models of parallel computer systems including PRAMs, loosely coupled systems and interconnection networks. Parallel algorithms for classical problems and general techniques for their design and analysis. Proving lower bounds on parallel computation in several settings.
Algorithms that operate on strings. Pattern matching, sets of patterns, regular expression pattern matching, suffix trees and applications, inexact similarity, parametric sequence alignment, applications to DNA sequencing and protein database searching.
Fundamental concepts. Planar graphs: Kuratowski's theorem. Packings and coverings. Menger's theorem, representation of cuts, Hamilton graphs, rigid graphs, chordal graphs, graph coloring, graph isomorphism, applications and some algorithms.
Mathematics of unstructured data. Algorithms for data structures such as Voronoi diagrams, oct-trees, and arrangements. Applications in computer graphics, concentrating on problems in three-dimensions.
Modern cryptography as a discipline emphasizing formal definitions and proofs of security. One-way functions, pseudo-randomness, encryption, digital signatures, zero-knowledge, secure protocols.
Cryptographic primitives and protocols of importance to e-commerce, present and future, including content distribution mechanisms, payment mechanisms, pricing mechanisms, anonymity and privacy mechanisms, fair exchange mechanisms.
Algorithmic problems in structural biology; protein structure classification; protein structure prediction (including comparative modeling and ab initio protein structure prediction); molecular simulations (molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo simulations). 
Numerical linear algebra (NLA) with emphasis on applications in engineered systems; matrix factorizations; perturbation and rounding error analyses of fundamental NLA algorithms.
Algorithms and techniques for large-scale scientific computation, including basics for high performance computing, iterative methods, discrete approximation, fast Fourier transform, Poisson solvers, particle methods, spectral graph partition and its applications.
Bioinformatics methods for analysis and inference of functional relationships among genes using large-scale genomic data, including methods for integration of gene expression, promoter sequence, TF-DNA binding and other data, and approaches in modeling of biological networks. 
Modern topics in computer security, including: protection, access control, operating systems security, network security, applied cryptography, cryptographic protocols, secure programming practices, safe languages, mobile code, malware, privacy and anonymity, and case studies from real-world systems.
Theoretical foundations of methods used to protect data in computer and communication systems. Access control matrix and undecidability of security; policies; Bell-LaPadula, Biba, Chinese Wall models; non-interference and non-deducibility; information flow and the confinement problem. 
Concepts of intrusion detection, anomaly detection based on machine learning, signature-based detection using pattern matching, automated response to attacks using artificial intelligence planning, tracing intruders based on principal component analysis, security policy languages.
Advanced topics in programming languages, including formal syntax and semantics, the relation between formal semantics and verification, an introduction to the lambda calculus. Additional topics will include language design principles, alternative programming languages, in-depth semantic theory and models of language implementation.
Lexical analysis, parsing, storage management, symbol table design, semantic analysis and code generation. LR, LALR grammars. Compilercompilers.
Compiler optimizations for performance, code size and power reduction. Topics include control- and data-flow analysis, redundancy elimination, loop and cache optimizations, register allocation, local and global instruction scheduling, and modulo scheduling.
Fundamental concepts and applications of concurrent programs; concurrent program verification and derivation; synchronization mechanisms in programming languages; distributed programming techniques; case studies of languages. 
Language design parameters. Models of parallel machines. Load balancing. Scalability. Portability. Efficiency measures. Design and implementation techniques for several classes of concurrent programming languages (such as object-oriented, functional, logic, and constraint programming languages).
Models, design, implementation, performance evaluation in operating systems. Algorithms, internal architectures for single processor OS and distributed systems. Concurrency control, recovery, security. OS kernel-level programming. Special topics embedded systems, real-time system, device driver, NPU (Network Processor Unit).
Internet protocol based computer networks applications, transport, network layer protocols. High speed LAN technologies: Ethernet, Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM). Delay models in data networks: analysis of multiaccess techniques in polling, ring, random access networks. Multimedia applications requirements and design. 
Develops the mathematical theory underlying growth, structure and function of networks with applications to physical, social, biological and engineered systems. Topics include network growth, resilience, epidemiology, phase transitions, software and algorithms, routing and search control, cascading failures.
Advanced research issues in wireless communication networks, including multi-user diversity and cross-layer optimization, basic network information theory, MIMO systems and the impact on networks, and dynamics spectrum management.
Probabilistic and statistical models useful in computer/data science.  Applications to networks, bioinformatics, database management, machine learning, software engineering and image processing.
Fundamental techniques in design of second generation wireless networks: cellular network and protocols, medium access techniques, handoff control, signaling and mobility management, wireless data works, Internet mobility and Personal Communication Services (PCS). Third generation wideband systems, novel technologies, adhoc networks.
Concepts and design principles of computer networks. Network architectures, protocol mechanisms and implementation principles (transport/network/data-link layers), network algorithms, router mechanisms, design requirements of applications, network simulation, modeling and performance analysis.
Concepts and design principles of computer networks. Network architectures, protocol mechanisms and implementation principles (transport/network/data-link layers), network algorithms, router mechanisms, design requirements of applications, network simulation, modeling and performance analysis.
Optical networks. Enabling technologies. Multiplexing techniques. WDM. Broadcast networks. Wavelength-routed networks. Network architectures. Protocols. Network algorithms. Device-network interface. Optimization problems. 
Advanced techniques for domain-specific software reuse.
Methods of proving correctness of programs with respect to formalspecifications, with attention to those suited for employing automated deduction.Logic background, symbolic execution, techniques suited to iterative programming, methods from denotational semantics, termination, dynamic logic and proofs of concurrent programs.
Formal specification of modules, and its relationship to topdownprogramming development and verification. Abstract data types, together with methods for specifying them. Implementations and proofs of implementation. Using specifications to reason about programs. Parameterized types. Constructing good formal specifications.
Concepts of distributed database systems and architectures, distributed database design, distributed query processing and optimization, transaction management and concurrency control, heterogeneous and multidatabase systems.
Concepts, models, and architectures for spatial databases, spatial access methods, query processing, spatio-temporal data management, moving objects, spatial data mining.  <p>
Wide-area distributed information systems, data broadcast, multicast, publish/subscribe, service differentiation, information retrieval, Web caching.
Scientific data integration, metadata, knowledge representation, ontologies, scientific workflow design and management.
Graduate seminar course on computer vision with an emphasis on object recognition, activity recognition, and scene understanding.
Concepts and techniques underlying the design and implementation of models of human performance on intelligent tasks. Representation of high-level knowledge structures. Models of memory and inference. Natural language and story understanding. Common sense planning and problem solving.
Artificial intelligence techniques for knowledge acquisition by computers. Fundamental problems in machine learning and discovery. Systems that learn from examples, analogies, and solved problems. Systems that discover numerical laws and qualitative relationships. Projects centering on implementation and evaluation.
Advanced topics in information visualization: perceptually effective display methods, color design and selection, interaction models and techniques, focus-context techniques, distortion methods, large graph visualization techniques, visual data mining methods, and evaluation methods. 
Visual computing paradigms, current visualization technologies,  principles of 3-d graphics, user interface designs, and exploratory visualization.
Techniques of mechanical theorem proving. Methods based on resolution and termrewriting. Decision procedures. Induction. Applications to program verification, question/answering and plan generation. Study existing mechanical theorem provers.
Advanced topics in computer graphics. Hidden surface models, rendering of various surface types, subdivision methods, shading techniques, anti-aliasing, modeling techniques.
Advanced topics in computer graphics and geometric modeling. Topics taken from advanced research papers in computer graphics, image synthesis, visualization and geometric modeling. Discussion of current research in the field.
Applications, available tools and techniques, the challenges confronting the field of volume visualization, and some of the advanced topics in the field. Primary emphasis on advanced software and hardware techniques to achieve interactive visualization.
Visualization of 3D data, including scalar fields, vector fields, and medical data.
Mathematical techniques for the definition and manipulation of curves and surfaces. Bezier curves and surfaces, B-spline curves and surfaces, subdivision surfaces, wavelets. Integration into various computer graphics rendering models, visualization systems and computer-aided design systems.
Surveys current research and fundamental techniques that lie behind character animation tools. Emphasis on improving expressive aspects of movement and how physics, motion capture data, the arts and psychology literature, and interactive techniques can be used towards this goal.
Fundamentals and principles of Virtual Reality (VR) technology. Potential and limits for its useful application. Developing a complete virtual reality application.
Special topic in Computer Science Theory.
Special topic in Architecture.
Special topic in Programming Languages & Compilers.
Special topic in Operating Systems.
Special topic in Software Engineering.
Special topic in Databases.
Special topic in Artificial Intelligence.
Special topic in Computer Graphics.
Special topic in Networks.
Special topic in Computer-Aided Design.
Special topic in Scientific Computing.
Special topic in Computer Science.
Special topic in Security.
Special topic in Bioinformatics & Computational Biology.
Study of research topics in computer science, Ph.D. level research methodologies (experimental, applied and theoretical). Study skills necessary to successfully find/solve significant research problems. Finding and successful interacting with a research advisor. Ethical issues in research/collaborative work.
Study of Ph.D. level research methodologies (experimental, applied and theoretical), presenting research results for the computer science community. Study skills necessary to successfully find/solve significant research problems. 

Participation as a teaching assistant or associate-in in a designated engineering course. Methods of leading discussion groups or laboratory sections, writing and grading quizzes, use of laboratory equipment, and grading laboratory reports.

Introduction to resources supporting first year student academic success and transition to a tier one research university.
Development of important skills necessary for research including critical thinking, study skills, writing skills, and presentation skills.
Development of important skills necessary for research including critical thinking, study skills, writing skills, and presentation skills.
Resources to explore academic and career connections and opportunities including internships, volunteer opportunities, graduate schools and careers.
Internship as a teachers aide or tutor in K-12 classrooms under the supervision of a faculty member.
Primarily for lower division students.
Bilingualism, first and second language acquisition, bilingual education, language assessment, Chicano Spanish and the role of dialect varieties in the classroom.
Communicative class taught in Spanish focused on the development of Spanish communication skills for current and/or future bilingual teachers. Main topics are related to school content areas in bilingual settings, with an emphasis on standard and Southwest Spanish dialects.
Analysis of research on learning styles among culturally diverse students with review and evaluation of responsive curricula and classroom teaching techniques. The ethnographic interview as a research tool.
Introduction to peer counseling techniques and development of peer counseling skills.
In-depth review and development of skills for specific counseling topics.
Theory and research on children's acquisition of their native language, including the sound system, grammatical systems, and basic semantic categories.
Applications of computers in education as instructional, intellectual, and communication tools.  
Applications of computers in education as instructional, intellectual, and communication tools.  
Applications of computers in education as instructional, intellectual, and communication tools.  
Exploration of effective teaching practices based on examination of how middle school students learn math and science. Selected readings, discussion and field experience in middle school classrooms. 
Design and implementation of a curricular unit to integrate computer technology into a K-12 classroom setting. A project-based seminar intended for students with substantial prior experience with instructional use of computers and related technologies. 
Exploration and creation of effective teaching practices based on examination of how high school students learn mathematics and science. Field experience in high school classrooms.
Internship as a tutor, teacher's aide, or peer counselor in a school or educational counseling setting under the supervision of a faculty member. May be taught abroad.
Leading of small voluntary discussion groups affiliated with the School's upper division courses under the supervision of, and at the option of, the course instructor, who will submit a written evaluation of the student's work.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.

Defining educational research questions, reviewing relevant literature,developing research designs, developing research instruments, selecting appropriate data analysis procedures, and writing research projects. A case problem will provide practice in designing and reporting research.
Examines the design and conduct of educational research using non-numerical data (e.g., text, discourse, imagery and artifacts). Focuses on issues (e.g., validity, reliability, generalizability, ethics) and reporting genres (e.g., narrative accounts, case studies, and arguments).
Introduces the theoretical assumptions underlying traditional test construction, as well as the basic statistical principles involved in the design, evaluation, and interpretation of standardized tests. Introduces the debates surrounding the uses of different kinds of tests and evaluation tools.
Methods for analysis of correlational data in educational research. Topics include multiple correlation and regression, discriminant analysis, logistic regression, and canonical correlation. Emphasis on conceptual understanding of the techniques and use of statistical software.
Methods for analysis of experimental data in educational research. Topics include ANOVA, fixed v. random effects models, repeated measures ANOVA, analysis of co-variance, MANOVA, chi square tests, small sample solutions to t and ANOVA.
Student research projects in specific schools with cooperative critical analysis of the design, data collection, and inferencing by researchers. Students will continue to meet with instructor as a group throughout the quarter to discuss specific projects.
Introduction to traditions and approaches of teachers conducting research in their own classrooms: purposes, focal areas, methods of data collection and analysis, and written genre conventions.
Analysis and application of teacher research through the development, implementation and evaluation of a short-term classroom research-based intervention. Particular attention to research that enhances learning of English language learners and under-performing students.
Proposal development for classroom-based inquiry designed to address student learning needs.  Mixed methods research design and preliminary data collection approaches. Design and application of baseline student assessment for proposal development. Literature review. Data collection in K-12 classrooms required.
Support of the inquiry in EDU 206C through continuous collaborative critique and feedback resulting in the writing and presentation of a research study.
Development of the skills of philosophical analysis and argument for the establishment of a point of view, in the consideration of curriculum theory and practice. Classical and contemporary approaches to subject matter and activity emphases, hidden curriculum, and moral education.
Rhetorical and substantive challenges of presenting educational research through written reports; research rhetoric and genres; competing discourse conventions of educational research, policy, and practice; the social organization of publishing educational research.
Theories of intellectual functioning and the measurement of cognitive abilities in school-aged children. Supervised practice in administration and scoring of contemporary tests for children including the WISC-R, the WAIS-R, the Stanford Binet, the McCarthy Scales of Children's Ability.
Analysis and critique of recent research on cognitive processes related to achievement motivation in school settings. Topics include self-determination theory, attribution theory, goal theory, intrinsic and extrinsic motivation, learned helplessness. psychological reactance, gender and culture, and research design.
Culture and social organization of schools. Examines perspectives of social researchers, educational policy-makers, and school members and their implications for educational research, policy and practice.
Focuses on understanding the social and political context of education in the U.S. and California and how education policy is formed in the broader public arena. Develops skills in educational policy analysis. (Former EDU 237.)
Critical study of culture and social organization of higher education institutions policies and functions in the U.S., with some attention to other countries.
Application of hierarchical linear models in education research across multiple areas, such as policy, curriculum, and assessment. Develop working knowledge of hierarchical linear modeling and an understanding of its use in existing research as well as student's work.
Principles and strategies of PAR and related methodologies that emphasize collaborating with those affected by the issue being researched in order to educate, take action or effect social change. Conduct interviews with potential collaborators, case analyses and research proposals.
Introduction to qualitative interviewing, focused in particular on narrative and self-story as both practical method and theoretical stance. Complete a case-focused interview project during the course: designing an interview protocol, conducting the interview, transcribing, analyzing, and presenting their research.
Analysis of recent research related to cognitive processing of written texts. Topics include word decoding, schema theory, background knowledge, assimilation, accommodation, working memory, processing depth, vocabulary acquisition, sentence-level processes, text-level processes, text structure, implications for curriculum and instruction.
Study of issues in research on composition; history of composition studies; data analysis techniques; product and process approaches; cognitive and social perspectives.
Recent theoretical and empirical work on reading in social contexts. Topics include reading as an individual interactive process; reading as a social and cultural process; critical perspectives on reading; implications of contrastive theoretical perspectives for curriculum and instruction in reading.
Examines form and type in discourse (e.g., narration, conversation, routines), approaches to discourse analysis, and research on classroom discourse (lessons, teaching/learning interactional sequences). Final term paper is an analysis of discourse data tape-recorded by student in a field setting.
Analysis and application of research on oral language development and literacy in language minority students, through the development, implementation, and evaluation of research-based language arts curriculum.
Analysis of curricular issues and goals in mathematics education, including long-term trends, current status and influences, proposed changes, and evaluation issues. Selected curriculum projects examined.
Examination of research process in mathematics education; review of critical productive problems identified by researchers; evolution of trends, issues, theories and hypotheses in various areas of mathematics education research. Emphasizes foundations.
Current research issues and activities in mathematics education: status, trends, theories and hypotheses. Formulation of research questions and design of studies. Projection of future directions for research.
Roles of calculators, computers, and graphing calculators in mathematics education will be addressed, with emphasis on the impact of these technologies on curriculum reform. Selected efforts to integrate technology into mathematics instruction will be examined.
History of curricular issues and goals in science education from the late-19th century forward, including long-term trends, current status and influences, proposed changes, and evaluation issues. National science standards and curriculum projects.
Research process and product in science education; review of critical science education issues; evolution of trends, theories and hypotheses in various areas of science education research. Survey of current major research in science education.
Current trends in science education reform locally, regionally, and nationally focusing on scientific literacy. Equity, access and "science for all."
Examination of contemporary theories of curriculum development, research about the relationship among instructional planning, classroom assessment, and student learning to guide teaching practice.
Analysis and application of English language acquisition and development research to teaching practice. Particular attention to research that enhances learning of English language learners and under-performing students. 
Prepares students to understand the nature/assumptions/logic of qualitative methodology as applied to educational settings, focusing on issues of design/conceptualization/ interpretation/application of qualitative research procedures. Use these methods in conducting studies in their educational settings.
Focus is on field-based and general quantitative research methods in education. Acquire skills and knowledge to collect, organize, analyze, and interpret univariate and multivariate quantitative data in educational research, dissertation projects, and field-based projects.
Educational leaders are introduced to qualitative, quantitative, and mixed-methods educational research methods and learn to frame research questions, identify data/data sources, use descriptive statistics, critically examine research studies, make sense of educational research/policy, and conduct independent studies.
Students identify problems from their educational settings, engage in data collection/analysis, write-up the process/results, and present to class. Work may become a dissertation proposal, if the problem or its extension is of sufficient interest and value.
Continuation of part one.
Continuation of part two.
Explore the history and emergent relationships among leadership theories/practice and their application to current educational settings. Reflect on and refine their personal theory of leadership.
Diversity of stakeholders and community issues in California schools and colleges will be explored. Emphasis will be placed on the interaction between underrepresented segments of society and educational institutions. Best Practices in leading diverse schools will be explored.
Examine the theory/practice/process of leadership in community-building and collaboration in/across communities, while addressing the utilization of human and material resources and the creation of partnerships, community linkages, and collaborative efforts.
Practical and theoretical perspectives for building a sense of vision to lead the profession of student affairs and to meet the needs of the whole student.
Learn/analyze the history/theory of educational policy. Explore how education leaders have/can positively influence the  process and implement effective policies in their local institutions. Policy issues covered: educational opportunity, equity, access, regulation, testing, tenure, accountability.
Conduct critical analyses of policy at the federal, judicial, state, regional and local levels. Specific California and federal policy environment structures, processes and people will be examined for intended consequences, ethical dilemmas, social justice and equity issues.
Critically examine the democratic purposes of education in light of existing National, State, and local policy reform efforts. Questions include, "In what ways are these reforms and policies guided by democratic ideas and challenged by those ideals."
Topics include: education finance theory, contemporary finance policy issues, intergovernmental relations, effective resource management, budget analysis and preparation.
Human resource and legal concepts and activities governing decisions of school leaders in public education. Attention to theory, application, and practice of personnel and risk management, curriculum, student services, teacher rights, torts, student rights.
Human resource management research and theory and for applying human resource techniques in the educational setting.
Use and examine multiple sources of information and data and trends found in making quality decisions to improve P-12/community college settings and addressing problems at sites. Learn limitations of these data sources.
Addresses the historical development of various curriculum and instructional methodologies found in public and private schools and colleges, and their impact on current curriculum development and reform efforts at the national, state and local level.
Third-year seminars encourage students to complete dissertations within the year. Cohort members meet together in every three-week meetings with faculty members and share their writing, data collection, analysis, discussion of results, development of conclusions/implications. 
Cohort members continue to meet with faculty and share their writing, data collection, analysis, development of conclusions/implications. 
Professional induction into educational research field and Graduate Group in Education at UC Davis. Introduction to landscape of educational research methodologies, purposes and theories. Analysis of debates within field. Investigation of K-12 educational outreach efforts at UC Davis.
Selected topics in education. Designed to facilitate preparation for the qualifying examination or dissertation. Students will critically analyze scholarly work including their own works in progress.
Group study.
Individual study under the direction of a faculty member.
Research for individual graduate students.
Principles, procedures, and curriculum materials for teaching of reading. Includes decoding skills with a special emphasis on phonics, comprehension skills, study skills, and reading in the content areas.
Principles, procedures, and curriculum materials for teaching of reading. Includes decoding skills with a special emphasis on phonics, comprehension skills, study skills, and reading in the content areas.
Principles, procedures, and curriculum materials for teaching of reading. Includes decoding skills with a special emphasis on phonics, comprehension skills, study skills, and reading in the content areas
Principles, procedures, and materials to help secondary school teachers improve the reading competence of students. Strategies for enhancing learning through reading and writing in all disciplines, with special attention to linguistically diverse populations.
Focuses on secondary school literacy practices and strategies for engaging English-speaking and bilingual students with textual, image, and digital literacies across content areas. Covers reading and writing, the Common Core and Language Proficiency standards.
Focuses on secondary school literacy practices and strategies for engaging English-speaking and bilingual students with textual, image, and digital literacies across content areas. Covers reading and writing, the Common Core and Language Proficiency standards. 
Principles, procedures, and materials for the teaching of oral and written expression, listening skills, drama, and children's literature in elementary schools.
Understanding the principles of education in the arts through participation. Development of concepts, introduction to media, and techniques suitable for the elementary school with emphasis on cross-discipline exploration.
Supervised teaching in regular classrooms in elementary schools. Selection and organization of teaching materials. Introduction to techniques of diagnosing school achievement of children.
Supervised teaching in regular classrooms in elementary schools. Current conceptions of elementary school curriculum, emphasis on contributionsfrom the social, biological, and physical sciences. Emphasis on effective teaching methods.
Supervised teaching in regular classrooms in elementary schools. Evaluation of teaching materials including instructional technology. Current elementary school curriculum with emphasis on contributions from fine arts and humanities.
Supervised teaching in regular or special education classrooms in middlegrades. Current conceptions of the middle-grades curriculum with emphasis on social, biological, and physical sciences. Effective teaching methods.
Supervised teaching in regular secondary classrooms. Techniques for classroom communications; constructing goals and objectives; assessment of learning; special problems of adolescents; instructional technology.
Supervised teaching in regular secondary classrooms. Techniques for classroom communications; constructing goals and objectives; assessment of learning; special problems of adolescents; instructional technology.
Supervised teaching in regular secondary classrooms. Techniques for classroom communications; constructing goals and objectives; assessment of learning; special problems of adolescents; instructional technology.
Principles, procedures, and materials for teaching the biological and physical sciences in elementary schools.
Principles, procedures, and materials for teaching history and the social sciences in elementary schools.
Mathematics curriculum and teaching methods for K-9 reflecting the needs of California's diverse student populations.
Mathematics curriculum and teaching methods for K9 reflecting the needs of California's diverse student populations.
Mathematics curriculum and teaching methods for K9 reflecting the needs of California's diverse student populations.
Presentation of issues related to classroom instruction and professional practice, reflections on classroom instruction and other documentation related to student teaching experience.
Introduction to teaching methods and curriculum approaches for secondary social science teaching. State and national curriculum standards; application of learning theory to effective instruction; interdisciplinary teaching and active learning approaches; effective teaching strategies for English learners.
Intermediate teaching methods and curriculum approaches for secondary social science teaching. Interdisciplinary approaches to teaching major themes across social science content areas; teaching potentially controversial social science topics; teaching democratic civic values, student assessment and evaluation.
Activity-based overview of concepts and processes in secondary school physical sciences. Emphasis upon philosophy, appropriate teaching methods, materials, assessment and evaluation of learning.
Activity-based overview of concepts and processes in secondary school biology and life sciences. Emphasis on philosophy, appropriate teaching methods, materials, assessment and evaluation of learning, and issues.
Introduction to methods and curriculum for teaching mathematics at the secondary level. Introduction to applications of computer technology as instructional, intellectual, and communication tools for mathematics teachers.
Expansion of methods and curriculum for teaching mathematics at the secondary level. Intermediate applications of computer technology as instructional, intellectual, and communication tools in mathematics teaching.
Research on teaching and learning in the language arts. Principles, procedures and materials for improving the writing, reading and oral language of secondary students, with special attention to students from culturally and linguistically diverse populations.
Research on principles, procedures and curricula for teaching discipline-specific concepts to language-minority students in secondary schools. Second-language acquisition principles and instructional strategies.
Introduction to methods for teaching Spanish as a foreign and a heritage language in secondary schools. State and National Standards. Theories on second language acquisition. Lesson plans. Effective teaching strategies and class management.
Continuation to methods for teaching Spanish as a foreign and a heritage language in secondary schools. Research and practice on foreign and heritage language teaching. Expansion of effective teaching strategies and class management.


Interactive and practical introduction to fundamental concepts of electrical and computer engineering by implementing electronic systems, which can be digitally controlled and interrogated, with a programmable microcontroller with the ability to program the electrical connections between analog and digital components.
Interactive and practical introduction to fundamental concepts of electrical and computer engineering by implementing electronic systems, which can be digitally controlled and interrogated, with a programmable microcontroller with the ability to program the electrical connections between analog and digital components.
Introduction to digital system design including combinational logic design, sequential and asynchronous circuits, computer arithmetic, memory systems and algorithmic state machine design; computer aided design (CAD) methodologies and tools.
Special topics in Electromagnetics.
Special topics in Physical Electronics.
Special topics in Active & Passive Circuits.
Special topics in Signals & Systems.
Special topics in Computer Systems & Software.
Special topics in Digital System Design.
Research group conferences.
Examination of a special topic in a small group setting.
Supervised work experience in Electrical & Computer Engineering.

Theory, application, and design of analog circuits. Methods of analysis including frequency response, SPICE simulation, and Laplace transform. Operational amplifiers and design of active filters.  
Work in groups to present electronic exhibits to the public.
Use and modeling of nonlinear solid-state electronic devices in basic analog and digital circuits. Introduction to the design of transistor amplifiers and logic gates.
Analysis and design of integrated circuits.  Single-stage amplifiers, cascaded amplifier stages, differential amplifiers, current sources, frequency response, and return-ratio analysis of feedback amplifiers.
MOS device fundamentals, introduction to the design of CMOS logic gates, layout, circuits, and modeling. Examination of voltage transfer characteristics, and propagation delay.
Electronic circuits for analog and digital communication, including oscillators, mixers, tuned amplifiers, modulators, demodulators, and phase-locked loops. Circuits for amplitude modulation (AM) and frequency modulation (FM) are emphasized.
CMOS devices, layout, circuits, and functional units; VLSI fabrication and design methodologies.
Analysis and design of digital integrated circuits. Emphasis on MOS logic circuit families. Logic gate construction, voltage transfer characteristics, propagation delay, and power consumption. Regenerative circuits, sequential elements, interconnect, RAMs, ROMs, and PLAs.
Design course involving architecture, circuit design, physical design, and validation through extensive simulation of a digital or mixed-signal integrated circuit of substantial complexity under given design constraints. Team project that includes a final report.
Design course involving architecture, circuit design, physical design, and validation through extensive simulation of a digital or mixed-signal integrated circuit of substantial complexity under given design constraints.  Team project that includes a final report.
Basics of static electric and magnetic fields and fields in materials. Work and scalar potential. Maxwell's equations in integral and differential form. Plan waves in lossless media. Lossless transmission lines.
Plane wave propagation in lossy media, reflections, guided waves, simple modulated waves and dispersion, and basic antennas.
Study of Radio Frequency and Microwave theory and practice for design of wireless electronic systems. Transmission lines, microwave integrated circuits, circuit analyis of electromagnetic energy transfer systems, the scattering parameters. 
Passive RF and microwave device analysis, design, fabrication, and testing for wireless applications. RF and microwave filter and coupler design. Introductory analysis and design of RF and microwave transistor amplifiers.
RF and microwave amplifier theory and design, including transistor circuit models, stability considerations, noise models and low noise design. Theory and design of microwave transistor oscillators and mixers. Wireless system design and analysis. 
Properties of electromagnetic radiation; analysis and design of antennas: ideal cylindrical, small loop, aperture, and arrays; antenna field measurements.
Board-level RF design, fabrication, and characterization of an RF/microwave system, including the antenna, RF front-end, baseband, mix-signal circuits, and digital signal processing models. 
Board-level RF design, fabrication, and characterization of an RF/microwave system, including the antenna, RF front-end, baseband, mix-signal circuits, and digital signal processing models. 
Principles of optical communication systems. Planar dielectric waveguides. Optical fibers. Silicon photonics. Attenuation and dispersion in optical fibers. Optical sources, detectors, transmitters, receivers, modulators, optical amplifiers, and optical multiplexers/demultiplexers. Optics in data centers and computing systems. Design of digital optical communication links.
Optical, electronic and communication-engineering design of an opto-electronic system operating under performance and economic constraints. Measurement techniques will be designed and implemented, and the system will be characterized.
Optical, electronic and communication-engineering design of an opto-electronic system operating under performance and economic constraints. Measurement techniques will be designed and implemented, and the system will be characterized.
Semiconductor device fundamentals, equilibrium and non-equilibrium statistical mechanics, conductivity, diffusion, electrons and holes, p-n and Schottky junctions, first-order metal-oxide-semiconductor (MOS) field effect transistors, bipolar junction transistor fundamentals.
Electrical properties, designs, models and advanced concepts for MOS, Bipolar, and Junction Field-Effect Transistors, including scaling, minority-carrier distributions, non-ideal effects, and device fabrication methods. MESFET and heterojunction bipolar transistors (HBTs). Fundamentals of solar cells, photodetectors, LEDs and semiconductor lasers.
Electronic and physical properties of materials used in electronics, ICs, optoelectronics and MEMS.  Semiconductors, dielectrics, metals, optical materials, organic semiconductive, optical and nonlinear properties, as well as their synthesis and deposition methods.
Theoretical and experimental study of basic fabrication processes for metal oxide semiconductor integrated circuits, including oxidation, photolithography, impurity diffusion, metallization, wet chemical etching, and characterization. 
Fabrication processes for CMOS VLSI. Laboratory projects examine deposition of thin films, ion implantation, process simulation, anisotropic plasma etching, sputter metallization, and C-V analysis. Topics include isolation, projection alignment, epilayer growth, thin gate oxidation, and rapid thermal annealing.
Characterization and analysis of continuous-time linear systems. Fourier series and transforms with applications. Introduction to communication systems. Transfer functions and block diagrams. Elements of feedback systems. Stability of linear systems.  
Characterization and analysis of discrete time systems. Difference equation models. Ztransform analysis methods. Discrete and fast Fourier transforms. Introduction to digital filter design.
Theory and practice of real-time digital signal processing.  Fundamentals of real-time systems.  Programmable architectures including I/O, memory, peripherals, interrupts, DMA.  Interfacing issues with A/D and D/A converters to a programmable DSP.  Specification driven design and implementation of simple DSP applications.
Analysis and design of feedback control systems. Examples are drawn from electrical and mechanical systems as well as other engineering fields. Mathematical modeling of systems, stability criteria, root-locus and frequency domain design methods.
Control system design; transfer-function and state-space methods; sampled-data implementation, digital control. Laboratory includes feedback system experiments and simulation studies.
Signal analysis based on Fourier methods. Fourier series and transforms; time-sampling, convolution, and filtering; spectral density; modulation: carrier-amplitude, carrier-frequency, and pulse-amplitude.
Probabilistic and statistical analysis of electrical and computer systems. Discrete and continuous random variables, expectation and moments. Transformation of random variables. Joint and conditional densities. Limit theorems and statistics. Noise models, system reliability and testing.
Introduction to random process models of modulated signals and noise, and analysis of receiver performance. Analog and digitally modulated signals. Signal-to-noise ratio, probability of error, matched filters. Intersymbol interference, pulse shaping and equalization. Carrier and clock synchronization.
Introduces basic aspects of computer architecture, including computer performance measurement, instruction set design, computer arithmetic, pipelined/non-pipelined implementation, and memory hierarchies (cache and virtual memory). Presents a simplified Reduced Instruction Set Computer using logic design methods from the prerequisite course. 
Organization and design of parallel processors including shared-memory multiprocessors, cache coherence, memory consistency, snooping protocols, synchronization, scalable multiprocessors, message passing protocols, distributed shared memory and interconnection networks.
Introduction to embedded-system hardware and software. Topics include: embedded processor and memory architecture; input/output hardware and software, including interrupts and direct memory access; interfacing with sensors and actuators; wired and wireless embedded networking.
Overview of computer networks, TCP/IP protocol suite, computer-networking applications and protocols, transport-layer protocols, network architectures, Internet Protocol (IP), routing, link-layer protocols, local area and wireless networks, medium access control, physical aspects of data transmission, and network-performance analysis. 
Advanced topics and design projects in communication networks.  Example topics include wireless networks, multimedia networking, network design and management, traffic analysis and modeling, network simulations and performance analysis. Offered in alternate years.
Advanced topics in computer networks, wireless networks, multimedia networking, traffic analysis and modeling, network design and management, network simulation and performance analysis, and design projects in communication networks. 
Computer-aided design of digital systems with emphasis on hardware description languages (VHDL), logic synthesis, and field-programmable gate arrays (FPGA). May cover advanced topics in digital system design such as static timing analysis, pipelining, memory system design, testing digital circuits.  
Digital-system and computer-engineering design course involving architecture, design, implementation and testing of a prototype application-specific processor under given design constraints. Team project includes a final presentation and report.
Digital-system and computer-engineering design course involving architecture, design, implementation and testing of a prototype application-specific processor under given design constraints. Team project includes a final presentation and report.
Computer aided-testing and design verification techniques for digital systems; physical fault testing; simulation-based design verification; formal verification; timing analysis.
Special topics in Computer Science.
Special topics in Programming Systems.
Special topics in Digital Systems.
Special topics in Communications.
Special topics in Signal Transmission.
Special topics in Digital Communication.
Special topics in Control Systems.
Special topics in Robotics.
Special topics in Signal Processing.
Special topics in Image Processing.
Special topics in High-Frequency Phenomena & Devices.
Special topics in Solid-State Devices & Physical Electronics.
Special topics in Systems Theory.
Special topics in Active & Passive Circuits.
Special topics in Integrated Circuits.
Special topics in Computer Software.
Special topics in Computer Engineering.
Special topics in Microprocessing.
Special topics in Electronics.
Special topics in Electromagnetics.
Special topics in Opto-Electronics.
Special topics in Computer Networks.
Research group conferences. 
Supervised work experience in electrical and computer engineering.  
Team design project for seniors in Electrical or Computer Engineering. Project involves analysis, design, implementation and evaluation of an Electrical Engineering or Computer Engineering system. Project is supervised by a faculty member.
Team design project for seniors in Electrical Engineering or Computer Engineering. Project involves analysis, design, implementation and evaluation of an Electrical Engineering or Computer Engineering system. Project supervised by a faculty member.
Design and construct an autonomous race car. Work in groups to design, build and test speed control circuits, track sensing circuits, and a steering control loop.  
Design and construct an autonomous race car. Students work in groups to design, build and test speed control circuits, track sensing circuits, and a steering control loop.
Covers various electrical and computer engineering standards and realistic design constraints including economic, manufacturability, sustainability, ethical, health & safety, environmental, social, and political.
Tutoring in Electrical & Computer Engineering courses, especially introductory circuits. For upper division undergraduate students who will provide tutorial assistance.


Theory and design of digital filters. Classification of digital filters, linear phase systems, all-pass functions, FIR and IIR filter design methods and optimality measures, numerically robust structures for digital filters.
Analytic tomographic reconstruction from projections in 2D and 3D; model-based image reconstruction methods; maximum likelihood and Bayesian methods; applications to CT, PET, and SPECT.
Two-dimensional systems theory, image perception, sampling and quantization, transform theory and applications, enhancement, filteringand restoration, image analysis, and image processing systems.
Analysis and design of MOS amplifiers, bias circuits, voltage references and other analog circuits. Stability and compensation of feedback amplifiers. Introduction to noise analysis in MOS circuits.
Analysis and design of MOS amplifiers, bias circuits, voltage references and other analog circuits. Stability and compensation of feedback amplifiers. Introduction to noise analysis in MOS circuits.
Noise and distortion in electronic circuits and systems. Application to communication circuits. Specific applications include mixers, low-noise amplifiers, power amplifiers, phase-locked loops, oscillators and receiver architectures.
Analysis and design of analog MOS integrated circuits. Passive components, single-ended and fully differential op amps, sampled-data and continuous-time filters.
Analysis and design of analog MOS integrated circuits. Passive components, Single-ended and fully differential op amps, Sampled-data and continuous-time filters.
Digital-to-analog and analog-to-digital conversion; component characteristics and matching; sample-and-hold, comparator, amplifier, and reference circuits.
Digital-to-analog and analog-to-digital conversion; component characteristics and matching; sample-and-hold, comparator, amplifier, and reference circuits.
Analog, digital, and mixed-signal CMOS implementations of communication-circuit blocks: gain control, adaptive equalizers, sampling detectors, clock recovery.
IC design for low power and energy consumption.  Low power architectures, logic styles and circuit design.  Variable supply and threshold voltages.  Leakage management. Power estimation.  Energy sources, power electronics, and energy recovery.  Applications in portable electronics and sensors.  Thermodynamic limits.
Integrated circuit design for low power and energy consumption. Low power architectures, logic styles and circuit design. Variable supply and threshold voltages. Leakage management. Power estimation. Energy sources, power electronics, and energy recovery. Applications in portable electronics and sensors. Thermodynamic limits.
Design of active and passive filters including filter specification and approximation theory. Passive LC filter design will cover doubly-terminated reactance two-port synthesis. Active filter design will include sensitivity, op-amp building blocks, cascade, multi-loop, ladder and active-R filter design.
Design of radio frequency and microwave filters including filter specification and approximation theory. Passive LC filter design covers doubly-terminated reactance two-port synthesis and coupling matrix based synthesis. Active filter design includes sensitivity, op-amp building blocks, and cascade filter design.
Radio frequency (RF) solid-state devices, RF device modeling and design rules; non-linear RF circuit design techniques; use of non-linear computer-aided (CAD) tools; RF power amplifier design.
Radio frequency (RF) solid-state devices, RF device modeling and design rules; non-linear RF circuit design techniques; use of non-linear computer-aided (CAD) tools; RF power amplifier design.
Integrated RF front end circuit design of receivers and synthesizers for wireless communications, such as LNA, mixers, PLL; noise and linearity analysis and specifications; theory and working mechanism of synthesizers and phase noise analysis.
Fundamental theory of RF transmitter and receiver, including noise analysis, transceiver architectures, and antenna arrays. Fundamental limitations, theory and design of amplifiers, oscillators and signal sources at THz and mm-wave frequencies
Theory, design, fabrication, analysis of advanced microwave circuits and devices. Wideband transformers, stripline/microstripline broadband couplers. Lumped and distributed filter synthesis. Broadband matching theory applied to microwave devices. Wideband and low noise FET/HEMT amplifiers. Advanced microwave oscillator theory. Phase noise analysis.
Focuses on the modeling, design, fabrication, and characterization of RF-MEMS while providing a thorough introduction to the technology with an emphasis on how it will benefit the design of adaptive RF/microwave wireless systems. 
Maxwell's equations, plane waves, reflection and refraction, complex waves, waveguides, resonant cavities, and basic antennas.
Maxwell's equations, plane waves, reflection and refraction, complex waves, waveguides, resonant cavities, and basic antennas.
Equilibrium plasma properties; single particle motion; fluid equations; waves and instabilities in a fluid plasma; plasma kinetic theory and transport coefficients; linear and nonlinear Vlasov theory; fluctuations, correlations and radiation; inertial and magnetic confinement systems in controlled fusion.
Equilibrium plasma properties; single particle motion; fluid equations; waves and instabilities in a fluid plasma; plasma kinetic theory and transport coefficients; linear and nonlinear Vlasov theory; fluctuations, correlations and radiation; inertial and magnetic confinement systems in controlled fusion.
Equilibrium plasma properties; single particle motion; fluid equations; waves & instabilities in a fluid plasma; plasma kinetic theory & transport coefficients; linear & nonlinear Vlasov theory; fluctuations, correlations & radiation; inertial & magnetic confinement systems in controlled fusion.
Equilibrium plasma properties; single particle motion; fluid equations; waves and instabilities in a fluid plasma; plasma kinetic theory and transport coefficients; linear and nonlinear Vlasov theory; fluctuations, correlations and radiation; inertial and magnetic confinement systems in controlled fusion.
Equilibrium plasma properties; single particle motion; fluid equations; waves & instabilities in a fluid plasma; plasma kinetic theory & transport coefficients; linear & nonlinear Vlasov theory; fluctuations, correlations & radiation; inertial & magnetic confinement systems in controlled fusion.
The exact formulation of applied electromagnetic problems using Green's functions.  Applications of these techniques to transmission circuits.
The exact formulation of applied electromagnetic problems using Green's functions. Applications of these techniques to transmission circuits.
An advanced treatment of electromagnetics with applications to passive microwave devices and antennas.
Design and analysis of interconnects in high-speed circuits and sub-systems; understanding of high-speed signal propagation and signal integrity concepts; electromagnetic modeling tools and experimental techniques.
Design and analysis of interconnects in high-speed circuits and sub-systems; understanding of high-speed signal propagation and signal integrity concepts; electromagnetic modeling tools and experimental techniques.
Physics and technology of electron beam emissions, flow and transport, electron gun design, space charge waves and klystrons.
Physics & technology of electron beam emission, flow and transport, electron gun design, space charge waves & klystrons with applications to accelerator systems, RF power sources for radar & communication systems, thermionic energy conversion, and electric space propulsion. Recent advances in materials & manufacturing technologies are also reviewed.
Theory and experimental design of traveling wave tubes, backward wave oscillators, and extended interaction oscillators.
Theory, modeling, & experimental design of traveling wave tubes, backward wave oscillators, and extended interaction oscillators employed in satellite commutations, plasma imaging, and underground imaging systems.
Physics and technology of gyrotrons, gyro-amplifiers, free electron lasers, magnetrons, crossfield amplifiers and relativistic devices.
Physics & technology of gyrotrons, gyro-amplifiers, free electron lasers, magnetrons, cross-field amplifiers, and relativistic devices employed in plasma fusion reactors, microwave heating, and high power microwave applications.
Optical propagation of electromagnetic waves and beams in photonic components and the design of such devices using numerical techniques.
Optical propagation of electromagnetic waves and beams in photonic components and the design of such devices using numerical techniques.
Nonlinear optical interactions in optical communication, optical information processing and integrated optics.  Basic concepts underlying optical nonlinear interactions in materials and guided media.
Theoretical and practical description of lasers. Theory of population inversion, amplification and oscillation using semiclassical oscillator model and rate equations. Description and design of real laser system. 
Oscillation threshold. Coupled cavity/atomic rate equations, Linear pulse propagation; dispersion, broadening, compression. Nonlinear pulse propagation. Energy extraction. Optical beams, resonators, eigenmodes, axial/transverse modes. Paraxial ray optics, resonator stability, ABCD matrices. Laser dynamics; transients, spiking, Q-switching, active and passive modelocking.
Understanding of fundamental optical transitions in semiconductor and quantum-confined systems are applied to diode lasers and selected photonic devices. The importance of radiative and non-radiativerecombination, simulated emission, excitons in quantum wells, and strained quantum layers are considered.
Understanding of fundamental optical transitions in semiconductors and quantum-confined systems are applied to diode & unipolar lasers and selected photonic devices. The importance of radiative and non-radiative recombination, simulated emission, excitons in quantum wells, and strained quantum layers are considered. Photonic integrated circuits based on active (with optical gain) and passive (without optical gain).  
Enabling technologies for optical fiber communication and data center networks. Physical layer issues for component and system technologies in high-speed data optical communications. High-capacity data multiplexing technologies including wavelength-division-multiplexing, time-division-multiplexing, and advanced coherent modulation. Optical signal transmission, optical amplification, and optical switching for telecom and data center networks.
Physical layer optical communications systems in network architectures and protocols.  Optical systems design and integration using optical component technologies.  Comparison of wavelength routed WDM, TDM, and NGI systems and networks.  Case studies of next generation technologies. 
High-capacity optical data systems and networks, built-on modern optical communication technologies. Technologies behind data center networking, software defined networking, and RF-optical networking. Physical layer issues in light of networking architectures and protocols. Optical communications systems design and integration. Systems technologies and higher-level network architecture, case studies. WDM, TDM, and EON networking, optical and wireless access technologies based on PON and ROF. 
Physical principles, characteristics and models of fundamental semiconductor device types, including P-N and Schottky diodes, MOSFETs and MESFETs Bipolar Junction Transistors, and light emitters/detectors.
Examines molecules for electronic devices and sensors. Covers: electronic states of molecules, charge transport in nanoscale systems, and fabrication and measurement of molecular-scale devices. Specific Topics: Hartree-Fock & Density Functional Theory, Landauer formalism, coulomb blockade, tunneling and hopping transport.
Physics of nano-structured materials and device operation.  Overview of new devices enabled by nanotechnology; fabrication and characterization methods; applications of nano-structures and devices.
Theory and practice of MEMS design. Micromechanical fundamentals, CAD tools, and case studies. A MEMS design project is required. Designs will be fabricated in a commercial foundry and tested in EEC 244B.
Survey of biodevice design from engineering and biological perspectives; micro-/nano-fabrication techniques; surface science and mass transport; essential biological processes and models; proposal development skills on merging aforementioned themes.
Individualized projects in the fabrication of analog or digital integrated circuits.
Semiconductor devices, including MOSFETs, heterojunction transistors, light-emitting diodes, lasers, sensors, detectors, power and high-voltage transistors, MEMS resonators, organic semiconductors and photovoltaics. All material is from recent literature, encouraging students to utilize search methods and critically assess the latest research. 
Physics and application of photovoltaics and solar cells, including design, fabrication technology, and grid incorporation. Mono and microcrystalline silicon devices; thin-film technologies, heterojunction and organic-semiconductor technologies. Collectors, electrical inverters and infrastructure issues. Challenges and concerns.
Theory and practices of nanofabrication used for producing ICs, electronic devices, optoelectronics, sensors, and microstructures. Major topics include electron-, photon-, and ion-beams and their interactions with solids, chemical vapor depositions, plasma processing and micromachining.
Theory and practice of nanofabrication (top-down and bottom-up approaches), used for producing integrated circuits, electronic devices, sensors, and microstructures. Process development and characterization.
Mathematical description of systems. Selected topics in linear algebra. Solution of the state equations and an analysis of stability, controllability, observability, realizations, state feedback and state estimation. Discrete-time signals and systems, and the Z-transform.
Nonlinear differential equations, second-order systems, approximation methods, Lyapunov stability, absolute stability, Popov criterion, circle criterion, feedback linearization techniques.
Nonlinear differential equations, second-order systems, approximation methods, bifurcations, Lyapunov stability, absolute stability, Popov criterion, circle criterion, sliding-mode control, feedback linearization techniques.
Modern control system design, theory, and techniques.  Topics will include single-loop feedback design; stability, performance and robustness of multivariable control systems; LQG design; H-infinity design; frequency response methods; and optimization-based design.
Review of single-loop feedback design. Stability, performance and robustness of multi-input multi-output control systems. H-infinity design. Frequency response methods. Optimization-based design. Algebraic design methods for uncertain systems.
Modeling optimization problems in engineering design and other applications; optimality conditions; unconstrained optimization (gradient, Newton, conjugate gradient and quasi-Newton methods); duality and Lagrangian relaxation constrained optimization. (Primal method and an introduction to penalty and augmented Lagrangian methods.)
Markov Decision Processes (MDP), dynamic programming, multi-armed bandit, Partially observable MDP, optimal stopping, stochastic scheduling, sequential detection and quickest change detection, competitive MDP and game theory, applications in dynamic systems such as queueing networks, communication systems, and multi-agent systems.
Random processes as probabilistic models for signals and noise. Review of probability, random variables, and expectation. Study of correlation function and spectral density, ergodicity and duality between time averages and expected values, filters and dynamical systems. Applications.
Random processes as probabilistic models for signals and noise. Probability and random variables, Convergence and limit theorems, Specification of random processes, Markov Chains, Wiener process and white Gaussian noise, Poisson process and shot noise, Processing and frequency analysis of random signals.
Signal processing in wireless and wireline communication systems. Characterization and distortion of wireless and wireline channels. Channel equalization and maximum likelihood sequence estimation. Channel precoding and pre-equalization. OFDM and transmit diversity. Array processing. 
Maximum stable throughput of Poisson collision channels.  Classic collision resolution algorithms.  Carrier sensing multiple access and its performance analysis.  System stability analysis.  Joint design of the physical/medium access control layers.  Capacity region of multi-access channels. Multi-access with correlated sources.  
Geometric formulation of least-squares estimation problems. Theory and applications of optimum Wiener and Kalman filtering. MAP and maximum likelihood estimation of hidden Markov models, Viterbi algorithm. Adaptive filtering algorithms, properties and applications. 
Introduction to parameter estimation and detections of signals in noise. Bayes and Neyman-Pearson likelihood-ratio tests for signal detection. Maximum-likelihood parameter estimation. Detection of known and Gaussian signals in white or colored noise.  Applications to communications, radar, signal processing.
Introduction to digital communications. Coding for analog sources. Characterization of signals and systems. Modulation and demodulation for the additive Gaussian channel. Digital signaling over bandwidth-constrained linear filter channels and over fading multipath channels. Spread spectrum signals.
Information theory and coding. Measure of information. Redundancy reduction encoding of an information source. Capacity of a communication channel, errorfree communications.
Topics include Entropy, Relatively Entropy, Mutual Information; Asymptotic Equipartition Property; Entropy Rates of Stochastic Process; Data Compression; Channel Capacity; Differential Entropy; Gaussian Channel; Rate Distortion Theory; Network Information Theory.
Time-varying multi-path fading channel models and receiver performance in fading channels;  multiple access techniques and multiple access receivers design and performance;  optimum design and the capacity of wireless channels.
Introduction to the theory and practice of block codes, linear block codes, cyclic codes, decoding algorithms, coding techniques. 
Introduction to convolutional codes, turbo codes, trellis and block coded modulation codes,soft-decision decoding algorithms, the Viterbi algorithm,reliability-based decoding, trellis-based decoding, multistage decoding.
Introduction to modern techniques for high-performance single andmultiple processor systems. Topics include advanced pipeline design, advanced memory hierarchy design, optimizing pipeline and memory use, and memory sharing among multiprocessors. Case studies of recent single and multiple processor systems.
Designing and analysis of high performance computer architecture with emphasis on vector processing, on-chip interconnect networks, chip-level multiprocessors, memory and storage subsystem design and impact of technological advances on computer architecture.
Concepts and design principles of computer networks. Network architectures, protocol mechanisms and implementation principles (transport/network/data-link layers), network algorithms, router mechanisms, design requirements of applications, network simulation, modeling and performance analysis.
Advanced topics in the theoretical foundations of network measurements, modeling, and statistical inferencing. Applications to Internet engineering, routing optimization, load balancing, traffic engineering, fault tolerance, anomaly detection, and network security. Individual project requirement.
Internet measurements and network inference, covering the entire data pipeline from data collection, analysis, modeling, to design of data-driven novel/intelligent networked systems. Operational networks: Internet backbone, cellular networks, edge networks, software-defined networks and network function virtualization, data center networks, cloud infrastructure, peer-to-peer and content distribution networks, online social networks, and networked Internet-of-things (IoTs).
Introduces fault-tolerant digital system theory and practice. Covers recent and classic fault-tolerant techniques based on hardware redundancy, time redundancy, information redundancy, and software redundancy. Examines hardware and software reliability analysis, and example fault-tolerant designs.
Introduces fault-tolerant digital system theory and practice. Covers recent and classic fault-tolerant techniques based on hardware redundancy, time redundancy, information redundancy, and software redundancy. Examines hardware and software reliability analysis, and example fault-tolerant designs. 
Design and analysis of the architecture of computer graphics systems.  Topics include the graphics pipeline with a concentration on hardware technqiues and algorithms, exploiting parallelism in graphics, and case studies of noteworthy and modern graphics arhitectures.  
Exploration of the architecture of modern parallel computers, their programming models, and their programming systems.
Exploration of the architecture of modern parallel computers, their programming models, and their programming systems.
Digital signal processors, building blocks, and algorithms. Design and implementation of processor algorithms, architectures, control, functional units, and circuit topologies for increased performance and reduced circuit size and power dissipation.
Design verification techniques for digital systems; simulation-based design verification techniques; formal verification techniques, including equivalence checking, model checking, and theorem proving; timing analysis and verification; application of design cerification techniques to microprocessors.
Introduction to design and optimization of digital computing systems for embedded applications. Topics include combinatorial optimization techniques, performance and energy optimization in embedded systems, compilation and architecture-specific mapping, programmable and reconfigurable platforms; design automation and algorithmic improvements to design process.
Review of several current techniques used to diagnose faults in both combinational and sequential circuits. Topics include path sensitization procedures, Boolean difference, D-algorithm random test generation, TC testing and an analysis of the effects of intermittent faults. 
Review of several current techniques used to detect physical faults in both combinational and sequential circuits. Topics include fault modeling, fault simulation, test generation, compression techniques, and testing architectures. 
Special topics in Computer Science.
Special topics in Programming Systems.
Special topics in Digital Systems.
Special topics in Digital Systems.
Special topics in Signal Transmission.
Special topics in Digital Communication.
Special topics in Control Systems.
Special topics in Robotics.
Special topics in Signal Processing.
Special topics in Image Processing.
Special topics in High Frequency Phenomena & Devices.
Special topics in Solid-State Devices & Physical Electronics.
Special topics in Systems Theory.
Special topics in Active & Passive Circuits.
Special topics in Integrated Circuits.
Special topics in Computer Software.
Special topics in Computer Engineering.
Special topics in Microprocessing.
Special topics in Electronics.
Special topics in Electromagnetics.
Special topics in Optoelectronics.
Special topics in Computer Networks.
Research problems, progress, and techniques in electrical and computer engineering.
Conducting research projects in electrical and computer engineering. Communicating research results in written reports and oral presentations. Systemic project implementation to answer a comprehensive scientific or technical question in the area of electrical and computer engineering.
Lectures on solid-state circuit and system design by various visiting experts in the field.
Lectures on solid-state technology by various visiting experts in the field.
Lectures, tutorials and seminars on topics in computer engineering.
Communications, signal and image processing, video engineering and computer vision.
Seminars on current research in systems and control by faculty and visiting experts. Technical presentations and lectures on current topics in robotics research and robotics technology.
Lectures on photonics and related areas by faculty and visiting experts.

Participation as a teaching assistant or associate-in in a designated engineering course. Methods of leading discussion groups or laboratory sections, writing and grading quizzes, use of laboratory equipment, and grading laboratory reports.

Theory and application of energy systems. Systems analysis, energy conversion technologies, environmental considerations, economics and system optimization.
Fundamentals of energy technology, economics, and policy. Survey and analysis of current and prospective climate policies at the local and global level, including but not limited to cap-and-trade, emissions offsets, intensity standards, technology standards, mandates and subsidies.
Selected topics of current interest in energy. Topics vary and will be announced at the beginning of each quarter. Seminar speakers include invited speakers from outside the university as well as faculty. 
Research
Structured programming in C for solving problems in engineering. Introduction to MATLAB and comparison study of C/C++ with MATLAB. 
Modern manufacturing methods, safety, manufacturing instructions, computer-aided manufacturing and their role in the engineering design and development process.
Supervised work-study experience in engineering.
Mentoring, coaching, tutoring and/or supervision of students in K-12 schools in Engineering-related topics.

Inviscid incompressible flow, compressible flow, ideal gas mixtures, psychrometrics, reacting mixtures and combustion.
Experiments to illustrate principles of mechanical systems. Signal analysis; Demonstration of basic sensors for mechanical systems; Experimental project design; Experiments involving voltage measurement; strain gauges, dynamic systems of 1st order.  
Experiments illustrating principles of thermal-fluid systems and related measurement devices. Statistical design of experiments and uncertainty analysis of data; thermodynamic cycles, combustion, compressible and incompressible flows.
Number representation, Taylor expansions, error  and stability analysis, roots of nonlinear equations, sets of linear equations, numerical integration, ordinary differential equations.
Technical elective that revisits dynamic principles with emphasis on engineering applications; Equations of motion are derived and put into a format for computer solution; There is a computer laboratory where real engineering systems are simulated.
Analytical and experimental studies of the dynamics, stability and control of vehicles such as cars, trailers, airplanes, motorcycles, bicycles and rail cars.
Stability of flexible systems. Introduction to fluid-structure interaction. Mechanical vibrations. Design of mechanical subsystems or systems under constraints. Dynamic instabilities. Flutter. Control effectiveness. Energy extraction from fluid-structure interactions. Design applications to aerospace, mechanical and biomedical systems.
Principles of mechanics applied to design. Deformation and stress analysis. Structural integrity under static and fluctuating loads. Projects demonstrate progression from concept to engineering analysis, with emphasis on strength and durability.
Principles of engineering mechanics applied to the design and selection of mechanical components. Design projects, which concentrate on conceptual design, engineering analysis, methods of manufacture, material selection, and cost.
Methods of statistical analysis with emphasis on applications in mechanical design and manufacturing. Applications include product evaluation and decision making, probabilistic design, systems reliability, and fatigue under random loading.
Principles of computer-aided mechanism design. Computer-aided kinematic, static, and dynamic analysis and design of planar mechanisms such as multiple-loop linkages and geared linkages. Introduction to kinematic synthesis of mechanisms.
Overview of mechatronics system and control system design concepts, control software architecture, control hardware architecture, microcontroller and interface technology for mechatronics control, sensor for mechatronics systems, actuator drives.
Introduction to combustion kinetics; premixed and diffusion flames; turbulent combustion; pollutant formation; examples of combustion devices such as internal combustion engines, gas turbines, furnaces and incinerators; alternative fuels.
Fundamentals of internal combustion engine design and performance. Future needs to adapt to environmental concerns, and the feasibility of better alternatives in the future.
Introduction to basic mechanisms and processes associated with heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC), including equipment and systems used for HVAC in residential and commercial buildings.
Conduction, convection, and radiation heat transfer. Computational modeling of heat transfer in engineering. Applications to engineering equipment with the use of digital computers.
Modeling of dynamic engineering systems in various energy domains. Analysis and design of dynamic systems. Response of linear systems. Digital computer simulation and physical experiments.
Classical feedback control systems; block diagrams; performance specifications; steady state errors; rise and settling times; root locus; PID controllers; Bode and Nyquist plots; stability; phase and gain margins; advanced topics as time allows.
Major mechanical engineering design experience; the mechanical engineering design process and its use in the design of engineering systems incorporating appropriate engineering standards and multiple realistic constraints.
Major mechanical engineering design experience; the mechanical engineering design process and its use in the design of engineering systems incorporating appropriate engineering standards and multiple realistic constraints. 
Directed group study in Energy Systems & the Environment.
Directed group study in Engineering Controls.
Directed group study in Engineering Dynamics.
Directed group study in Biomechanics.
Directed group study in Fluid Mechanics.
Directed group study in Manufacturing Engineering.
Directed group study in Mechanical Engineering & Product Design.
Directed group study in Mechatronics Systems.
Directed group study in MEMS/Nanotechnology.
Directed group study in Solid & Structural Mechanics.
Directed group study in Thermodynamics.
Directed group study in Vehicle & Transportation Systems.
Supervised work experience in mechanical engineering.
Mentoring, coaching, tutoring and/or supervision of students in K-12 schools in Engineering-related topics.


Intended to give the undergraduate student an opportunity to conduct "hands-on" clinical research in the Emergency Department. Through the lecture/discussion, students will learn the basics of conducting and developing clinical research studies, using examples from ongoing studies.
Directed towards the undergraduate students at UC Davis that volunteer at the Joan Viteri Memorial Clinic (JVMC).
Intended to give the upper division undergraduate student an opportunity to conduct "hands-on" clinical research in the Emergency Department. Through the lecture/discussion, students learn the basics of conducting and developing clinical research studies.
Field experience in health care delivery, patient histories and physical examinations, health promotions and disease prevention, diagnosis and treatment of episodic, acute and chronic illness, basic laboratory testing and appropriate referral and follow-up. Students must apply and interview.
For students interested in working on specific EM projects in a more extensive way. Must commit at least four hours per week for two quarters.
Directed research in the Department of Emergency Medicine.
Exposure to the specialty of Emergency Medicine and observation of a wide array of patients in the Emergency Department. 
In-depth review of clinical and medical toxicologic emergencies. Rotation includes contact with toxicology trained emergency faculty, didactic lectures, journal club, simulation training and exposure to a very busy poison control center.
Introductory elective course for students to explore how physicians can interact with the environment in austere conditions through lectures, hands-on/field experience, and case-based learning.
Students complete clinical shifts in the Emergency Department, functioning as Acting Intern. Treat a wide variety of patients and problems under the supervision of the EM Attending. Students are expected to take focused histories and present in clear, concise fashion.
Intended for students interested in learning both the technical and cognitive skills of bedside ultrasound. Emphasis will be on the use of ultrasound in emergency medicine as a diagnostic tool and in procedural guidance.
Directed towards gaining a greater proficiency of point-of-care ultrasound. Particularly useful for those pursuing careers that use this modality heavily in clinical practice such as primary care, pediatrics, emergency medicine, critical care, physical medicine and rehabilitation, etc.  
Directed towards gaining a greater proficiency of point-of-care ultrasound. Particularly useful for those pursuing careers that use this modality heavily in clinical practice such as primary care, pediatrics, emergency medicine, critical care, physical medicine and rehabilitation, etc.
Students complete clinical shifts in the Emergency Department, functioning as Acting Intern. Treat a wide variety of patients and problems under the supervision of the EM Attending. Students are expected to take focused histories and present in clear, concise fashion.
See patients in the Pediatric area of the Emergency Department under the supervision of an Emergency Medicine Attending. Emphasis on recognition and management of the acutely ill pediatric patient and treatment of common pediatric complaints.  
Paradigm of healthcare delivery in the U.S. is changing rapidly. To prepare the next generation of physician leaders, provide the skills, tools, and knowledge needed to impact decisions made at the policy level.
Simulator-based skills training for emergency procedures. Topics include airway management, central venous access, chest tube placement, and general critical care resuscitation skills. 
Special Studies Module, a four-week course specific to the topics of Cardiac Arrest, Resusciatation & Repurfusion.
Special Studies Module, a four-week course specific to the topics of Cardiac Arrest, Resusciatation & Repurfusion.
Elective where topics may be selected in either basic or clinical research areas of Emergency and/or Critical Care Medicine. The
Examination of materials science computer applications through additional readings, discussions, collaborative work, or special activities which may include projects or computer simulations.
Examination of solid-state materials science and modern physics topics through additional readings, discussions, collaborative work, or special activities which may include projects, laboratory experience or computer simulations.
Basic principles of polymer science presented including polymer structure and synthesis; polymerization mechanisms, polymer classes, properties, and reactions; polymer morphology, rheology, and characterization; polymer processing.
Review of thermodynamic principles of interest to materials scientists and engineers. Application of thermodynamics to material processing, phase stability, corrosion.
Review of thermodynamic principles of interest to materials scientists and engineers. Application of thermodynamics to material processing, phase stability, corrosion.
Description of the structure of engineering materials on the atomic scale by exploring the fundamentals of crystallography. Importance of this structure to materials properties. Description of experimental determination using x-ray diffraction techniques.
Experimental investigations of structure of solid materials are combined with techniques for characterization of materials.  Laboratory exercises emphasize methods used to study structure of solids at the atomic and microstructural levels.  Methods focus on optical, x-ray and electron techniques.
Experimental investigations of structure of solid materials are combined with techniques for characterization of materials. Laboratory exercises emphasize methods used to study structure of solids at the atomic and microstructural levels. Methods focus on optical, x-ray and electron techniques.
Basic kinetic laws and the principles governing phase transformations. Applications in diffusion, oxidation, nucleation, growth and spinodal transformations.
Basic kinetic laws and the principles governing phase transformations. Applications in diffusion, oxidation, nucleation, growth and spinodal transformations.
Basic kinetic laws and the principles governing phase transformations. Applications in diffusion, oxidation, nucleation, growth and spinodal transformations.
Basic principles of future energy devices such as lithium batteries, fuel cells, and photovoltaic cells. Examines the current status of these energy technologies and analyze challenges that still must be overcome.
Fundaments of manufacturing and characterization of energy devices, such as lithium batteries, fuel cells and photovoltaic cells. Discussion on limiting factors in the performance of the devices. 
Electronic, optical, and magnetic properties of materials as related to structure and processing of solid state materials. Physical principles for understanding the properties of metals, semiconductors, ceramics, and amorphous solids and the applications of these materials in engineering. 
Electronic, optical, and magnetic properties of materials as related to structure and processing of solid state materials. Physical principles for understanding the properties of metals, semiconductors, ceramics, and amorphous solids and the applications of these materials in engineering. 
Experimental investigation of electronic, optical and magnetic properties of engineering materials, emphasizing the fundamental relationship between microstructure and properties as well as  the influence of rate processes on the evolution of the microstructure and properties.
Experimental investigation of electronic, optical and magnetic properties of engineering materials, emphasizing the fundamental relationship between microstructure and properties as well as the influence of rate processes on the evolution of the microstructure and properties.
Microscopic and macroscopic aspects of the mechanical behavior of engineering materials, with emphasis on recent development in materials characterization by nondestructive testing. Fundamental aspects of plasticity in engineering materials, strengthening mechanisms and mechanical failure modes of materials systems.
Experimental investigation of mechanical behavior of engineering materials.  Laboratory exercises emphasize the fundamental relationship between microstructure and mechanical properties, and the evolution of the microstructure as a consequence of rate process.
Experimental investigation of mechanical behavior of engineering materials.  Laboratory exercises emphasize the fundamental relationship between microstructure and mechanical properties, and the evolution of the microstructure as a consequence of rate process.
Quantitative treatment of materials selection for engineering applications. Discussion of design and material selection strategy; process and process selection strategy; process economics; life-cycle thinking and eco-design. Use of materials selection software.
Quantitative treatment of materials selection for engineering applications. Discussion of design & material selection strategy; process & process selection strategy; process economics; life-cycle thinking & eco-design. Use of materials selection software.
Principles of phase equilibria, thermodynamics and reaction kinetics applied to materials processing. Effects of processing variables on the structure-property relationship. Fundamentals of the manufacturing processes for electronic, optical, functional and structural materials. 
Fundamental physical and chemical principles underlying various processing techniques, used in manufacturing processes for bulk (3D) and composite structural and functional materials. Effects of processing variables on structure-property relationships. 
Analysis of the way materials fail. Effects of temperature, mechanical deformation and corrosion on the properties of materials. forensics and methodologies for investigating failures of materials including optical microscopy, x-ray analysis and scanning electron microscopy. Investigation of practical problems.
Fundamentals of processing methods for two-dimensional materials, including thin films and graphene-like materials; as well as nanomaterials, including nanoparticles, nanowires, and quantum dots.
Major materials design experience involving analysis of real materials synthesis/processing/fabrication and technological applications including critical assessments of economic, manufacturing, and ethical constraints. Various principles of materials science are integrated into a culminating team design project.
Examination of special topics covered in the materials design course through additional readings, discussions, collaborative work, or special activities which may include projects, laboratory experience or computer simulations.
Major materials design experience involving analysis of real materials synthesis/processing/fabrication and technological applications including critical assessments of economic, manufacturing, and ethical constraints. Various principles of materials science are integrated into a culminating team design project.
Examination of special topics covered in the materials design course through additional readings, discussions, collaborative work, or special activities which may include projects, laboratory experience or computer simulations.
Individual and/or group conference on problems, progress and techniques in materials research.
Supervised work experience in the Materials Science & Engineering field.
Group study of selected topics.
Special study for advanced undergraduates.
Principles and techniques of scanning and transmission of electron microscopy used in the study of materials will be described. Emphasis upon practical applications. 
Practical application of techniques of electron scanning and transmission microscopy including x-ray microanalysis.
Thermodynamic and kinetic foundations of the corrosion and oxidation processes. Practical aspects of corrosion control and prevention. Stress-corrosion and gas-embrittlement phenomena. Special topics in corrosion; microbiological and atmospheric corrosion.
Survey of biodevice design from engineering and biological perspectives; micro-/nano-fabrication techniques; surface science and mass transport; essential biological processes and models; proposal development skills on merging aforementioned themes.
Physics and application of photovoltaics and solar cells, including design, fabrication technology, and grid incorporation. Mono and microcrystalline silicon devices; thin-film technologies, heterojunction and organic-semiconductor technologies. Collectors, electrical inverters and infrastructure issues. Challenges and concerns.	
Description of the failure of materials by crack propagation.  Topics include the stress fields about elastic cracks, the Griffith-Irwin analysis, descriptions of plastic zones, fracture toughness testing, microstructural aspects of fracture and failure at elevated temperatures.
Microstructural description of the mechanisms of fatigue in metals.  Topics include a phenomenological treatment of cyclic deformation, dislocation processes in cyclic deformation, fatigue crack nucleation, Stage I growth, threshold effects and high temperature cyclic deformation.
Selected topics of current interest in polymer and fiber sciences. Topics vary each time course is offered. 
Selected topics of current interest in polymer and fiber sciences. Topics vary each time course is offered. 
Selected topics of current interest in polymer and fiber sciences. Topics will vary each time the course is offered. 
Selected topics of current interest in polymer and fiber sciences. Topics will vary each time the course is offered. 
Selected topics of current interest in polymer and fiber sciences. Topics will vary each time the course is offered. 
Selected topics of current interest in polymer and fiber sciences. Topics will vary each time the course is offered. 
Selected topics of current interest in polymer and fiber sciences. Topics vary each time course is offered. 
Selected topics of current interest in polymer and fiber sciences. Topics will vary each time the course is offered. 
Selected topics of current interest in polymer and fiber sciences. Topics will vary each time the course is offered. 
Thermodynamic principles, formalism and their application to solid materials. Specific examples from ceramic and solid state systems. Use of thermodynamic approach in developing understanding of and constraints for processes in real systems.
Thermodynamic principles, formalism and their application to solid materials. Statistical mechanics and the relations between microscopic and macroscopic properties. Prediction of phase diagrams and phase stability, particularly for solids.
Nature of microstructure in engineering materials. Crystalline and non-crystalline structures, with special emphasis on grain boundary segregation in the development of polycrystalline microstructure and the radial distribution function of amorphous materials.
Thermodynamic driving forces and atomic-scale mechanisms underlying diffusive mass transport and interface motion in materials.  Nucleation, growth and coarsening dynamics of phase transformations. 
Fundamental physical properties of solid materials important to solid state devices, specifically electronic, magnetic, and optical properties. Topics include band structures, metals, superconductors, semiconductors, dielectrics, optical properties, and magnetic properties and implementation of these properties into devices.
Comprehensive study of mechanical properties of materials, with special attention to dislocations and deformation and fracture control mechanisms. Mechanical properties of conventional engineering materials as well as advanced materials such as nanocrystalline solids and thin films are considered.
Advanced materials design experience involving analysis of engineering applications of materials, including synthesis, processing, and fabrication. Additional consideration of critical assessments of economics, manufacturing, and ethical constraints. Fundamental principles of materials science are integrated into a culminating capstone project.
Advanced materials design experience involving analysis of engineering applications of materials, including synthesis, processing and fabrication. Additional consideration of critical assessments of economics, manufacturing, and ethical constraints. Fundamental principles of materials science are integrated into a culminating capstone project.
Modern paradigms in glass science and their applications to technologies. Relation of macroscopic properties of glasses and glass-forming liquids to atomic-level structures, including principles of formation, relaxation, transport phenomena, nucleation, crystallization and phase separation in glasses.
Special topics in Electronic Materials.
Special topics in the discipline of Materials Science & Engineering. Topics will vary by instructor.
Special topics in Ceramics and Minerals.
Special topics in Ceramics and Minerals.
Special topics in Physics and Chemistry of Materials.
Special topics in Physics and Chemistry of Materials.
Special topics in Materials Processing.
Special topics in Materials Processing.
Special topics in Materials Science and Forensics.
Special topics in Materials Science and Forensics.
Special topics in Biomaterials.
Special topics in Biomaterials.
Special topics in Surface Chemistry of Metal Oxides.
Special topics in Surface Chemistry of Metal Oxides.
Selected topics of current interest in Materials Science & Engineering. Subjects covered vary from year to year and are announced at the beginning of each quarter.
Individual and/or group conference on problems, progress, and techniques in Materials Science & Engineering research. 
Work or lab experience in industry or off-campus lab focusing on Materials Science & Engineering applications at the graduate level.
Research.
Participation as a teaching assistant or associate-in in a designated engineering course. Methods of leading discussion groups or laboratory sections, writing and grading quizzes, use of laboratory equipment, and grading laboratory reports.
Introduction to the engineering design process that incorporates the development of oral and written communication skills integral to the design process. Conducted in workshop format with hands-on engagement in the design process.
Methodology for solving engineering problems. Engineering computing and visualization based on MATLAB. Engineering examples and applications.
Understanding of how the technology in our lives works using only basic concepts and rudimentry mathematics.
Engineering profession and its role in society; engineering design and development process; introduction to the engineering grand challenges; and professional resources for students.
Engineering disciplines; the engineering professions methods, principles, and career opportunities; professional resources for students.
Basic electric circuit analysis techniques, including electrical quantities and elements, resistive circuits, transient and steady-state responses of RLC circuits, sinusoidal excitation and phasors, and complex frequency and network functions.
Introductory overview of the space environment. Discussion of space exploration technology including propulsion, orbital mechanics, and spacecraft engineering.
Force systems and equilibrium conditions with emphasis on engineering problems.
Introduction to the properties of engineering materials and their relation to the internal structure of materials.
Introduction to the properties of engineering materials and their relation to the internal structure of materials.
Examination of special materials science and engineering topics through additional readings, discussions, collaborative work, or special activities which may include projects, laboratory experience or computer simulations.
Introduction to the properties of engineering materials and their relation to the internal structure of materials.
Introduction to the properties of engineering materials and their relation to the internal structure of materials.
Introduction to analog and digital circuit and system design through hands on laboratory design projects. 
Kinematics and kinetics of particles, systems of particles, and of rigid bodies; application of these topics are applied to engineering problems.
Fluid properties, fluid statics, continuity and linear momentum equations for control volumes, flow of incompressible fluids in pipes, dimensional analysis and boundary-layer flows.
Uniaxial loading and deformation. General concepts of stress-strain-temperature relations and yield criteria. Torsion of shafts. Bending of beams. Deflections due to bending. Introduction to stability and buckling.
Uniaxial loading and deformation. General concepts of stress-strain-temperature relations and yield criteria. Torsion of shafts. Bending of beams. Deflections due to bending. Introduction to stability and buckling.
Experiments which illustrate the basic principles and verify the analysis procedures used in the mechanics of materials are performed using the basic tools and techniques of experimental stress analysis.
Fundamentals of thermodynamics: heat energy and work, properties of pure substances, First and Second Law for closed and open systems, reversibility, entropy, thermodynamic temperature scales. Applications of thermodynamics to engineering systems. May be taught abroad.
The analysis of problems in engineering economy; the selection of alternatives; replacement decisions. Compounding, tax, origins and cost of capital, economic life, and risk and uncertainty are applied to methods of selecting most economic alternatives.
Principles of AC and DC electric motors and generators, their control systems and power sources. Selection of electric power equipment components based on their construction features and performance characteristics.
Hydraulic and pneumatic systems with emphasis on analysis and control of actuators. Design of hydraulic and pneumatic systems, specification and sizing of components, and selection of electro-hydraulics/electro-pneumatics, servo valves, and closed loop systems to solve basic control problems.
Free and forced vibrations in lumped-parameter systems with and without damping; vibrations in coupled systems; electromechanical analogs; use of energy conservation principles.
Impact of humankind on the environment are discussed from the point of view of the physical sciences. Calculations based on physical principles will be made, and the resulting policy implications are considered.
Solutions of systems of linear and nonlinear algebraic equations; approximation methods; solutions of ordinary differential equations; initial and boundary value problems; solutions of partial differential equations of Elliptic, parabolic, and hyperbolic types; Eigen value problems.
Focus on scientific understanding and development of power generation that is the basis of modern society. Concentration on power generation methods that are sustainable, in particular, discussion of the most recent innovations.
Management of the engineering and technology activity. Functions of design, planning, production, marketing, sales, and maintenance. Technological product life cycle. Research and development activity. Project planning and organization. Manufacturing issues. Case studies.
Principles and practices of planning and managing urban vegetation. Basics of tree appraisal, natural resource inventory, and development of long term urban forest management plans.
Identification and evaluation of 200 tree species of the urban forest on campus, in the Arboretum, and in the city of Davis; appraised and aesthetic values, condition, and branch structure; contribution of trees to this ecosystem. Bicycle required.
Physiological principles and processes essential to floriculture, nursery crop production, turfculture and landscape horticulture.Emphasis on the control of vegetative and reproductive development for a broad species range in greenhouse and extensive landscape environments.
Classification and identification of introduced and native species used in urban forests, with emphasis on floral and vegetative characteristics of the prominent families of angiosperms and gymnosperms, adaptations to environmental variations in western landscapes, and horticultural classification.
Principles of soil science and practices related to management of container media are taught, emphasizing appropriate use of soils and amendments, irrigation, and fertilizers.Physical and chemical properties are tested and effects of management on crops are evaluated in the laboratory.
Principles and techniques for the production of ornamental greenhouse and nursery crops. Hands-on experience producing greenhouse crops. Optional weekend field trip.
Principles and practices of managing trees and shrubs in the urban landscape and other managed environments. Topics include woody plant form; growth response and adaptation; tree management in relation to soil, moisture, climate; plant problems.
Conservation of genic diversity, measurement of diversity, threats to diversity and reasons for protection, the process of extinction, distribution of diversity, determination of what to conserve and means of conservation. Examples drawn largely from forest tree species.
Application of ecological complexity to restoration design, implementation and monitoring across variable environments and under changing environmental conditions. Integration of physiology, population, community, ecosystem, and landscape ecology.
Broad, interdisciplinary approach to effective restoration. Design and implementation of restoration projects based on principles of physiology, population, community, ecosystem and landscape ecology.
Companion field course to ENH 160.  Series of part-day and all day visits to various field sites, involving site evaluations, guest field presentations by local restorationists, and actual restoration activities.
Introductory study of several genres of English literature, emphasizingboth analysis of particular works and the range of forms and styles in English prose and poetry. Frequent writing assignments will be made.
Critical inquiry into significant literary texts. Emphasis on close reading, classroom dialogue, and the writing of several papers or a longer seminar paper.
Elementary principles of writing fiction. Write both in prescribed forms and in experimental forms of their own choosing. No final examination.
Elementary principles of writing creative non-fiction. Work in prescribed literary forms (such as essay, meditation, biography, memoir, book review, documentary, or experimental non-fiction forms) and forms of students' choosing. No final examination.
Elementary principles of writing poetry. Write both in prescribed forms and in experimental forms of their own choosing. No final examination.
Historical introduction to English language and literature from 800-1700. Linguistic borrowing, innovation, and change. Emergence of key literary genres. Colonial America as a new site of English literary production and consumption.
Historical introduction to English language and literature from 1700-1900. Linguistic borrowing, innovation, colonization, and change. Emergence and development of key literary genres. America, Britain, Ireland, Scotland, and India as important sites of English literary production and consumption.
Historical introduction to English language and literature from 1900-present. Linguistic borrowing, innovation, and change. Emergence and development of key literary genres. Formal experimentation. Modernism as transnational phenomenon.
Study of a special topic. Literature written in English in any period or place or genre.  Thematic, formal, or temporal focus.
Study of a topic centered on the relationships between literature and moving-image media.
Close reading and interpretation of literature from a variety of traditional and contemporary approaches.  Topics include traditional textual and historical approaches; new criticism; formalism; psychological criticism; feminism and gender; reader-response; materialist approaches. Frequent written assignments.
Close reading of, and topics relating to selected works of British and American drama from a range of historical periods.
Close reading of, and topics relating to, British and American Fiction: short stories, novellas, novels.  
Topical study and close reading of selections from English and American poetry.
Internships in fields where students can practice their skills. May be taught abroad.

Student facilitated course intended primarily for lower division students.
Writing of fiction. No final examination.
Development and evaluation of students' work in prose, primarily in the workshop format. Some reading and discussion of published novels and short stories. Conferences with individual students once per quarter. 
Writing of non-fiction. No final examination.
Writing of poetry. 
Development and evaluation of students' work in poetry, primarily in the workshop format. Some reading and discussion of published works of poetry. Conferences with individual students once per quarter. 
History of the English language. Examination of the language as recorded from Old English to present-day English. Relationship of English toother languages; development of vocabulary, phonology, and grammatical patterns.
Survey of present-day English grammar as informed by contemporary linguistic theories. The major syntactic structures of English; their variation across dialects, styles, and registers; their development; and their usefulness in describing the conventions of English.
Practice in teaching the principles of grammar to the kinds of audiences teachers encounter in California.  Discussions with teachers who teach in these areas.  Examination of pedagogical research on teaching grammar.
Historical development of fundamental issues and contemporary controversies about freedom of expression, with emphasis on literary and artistic censorship. 
Key theoretical terms, concepts, and thinkers from the Greeks to the modern era.
History of literary criticism in the modern era, with emphasis on the ties with the past and the special problems presented by modern literary theory.
Historically or thematically focused intensive examination of selected topics in Medieval British literature.
Development of the poet's artistry and ideas from his first work to his masterpiece, "Troilus and Criseyde."
Literary analysis of the complete "Canterbury Tales."  Courtly love, literary forms, medieval science and astrology, theology and dogma as they inform the reading of Chaucer's work.
Historically or thematically focused study of works of the Renaissance.
Historically, generically, or thematically focused study of Shakespeare's works.
Historically, thematically, or generically focused study of the relationship between law and literature.
Selected major works, including Paradise Lost.
Historically or thematically focused study of 18th-century English literature.
Intensive study or treatment of special topics relating to the emergence, invention, and re-invention of Irish literature.  
Historically or thematically focused study of works of Romantic English literature. 
Historically or thematically focused study of works of 19th-century English literature.
Historically or thematically focused study of works of British literature (drama, poetry, prose fiction) from the period between 1900 and the end of World War II.
Historically or thematically focused study of works of British literature (drama, poetry, prose fiction) from the period between 1945 and the present. May be taught abroad.
Historically or regionally focused study of world literatures in English (other than the national literatures of British Isles and the United States), particularly from post-colonial regions in Africa, the Caribbean, and Asia, and immigrant cultures in the English-speaking world. 
Study of postcolonial literature of Anglophone colonies. Specific emphases may include literature from and about Anglophone India, the Caribbean, the Middle East, South Asia, Africa, and/or South America.
Study of literatures, histories, and cultures of one or more diasporic groups.
Historically or thematically focused study of American literature of the 17th and 18th centuries. 
Historically or thematically focused study of works of 19th-century American literature. 
Historically or thematically focused study of works of post-Civil War American literature. 
Historically or thematically focused study of American literature (drama, poetry, prose fiction) from the period between 1900 and the end of World War II.
Historically or thematically focused study of American literature (drama, poetry, prose fiction) from the period between 1945 and the present.
Intensive examination of literature considered in topical terms, not necessarily historically. May be taught abroad.
Historically or thematically focused study of works of English drama prior to 1800.
Historically or thematically focused study of works of British drama from 1800 to the present.
Historical or thematic study of drama.
Thematically, historically, and formally focused study of the graphic novel genre. Contents may include any regional, national, or transnational group of graphic novels.
Historically or thematically organized examination of the 18th-century British novel, with particular emphasis on its evolution, including the epistolary novel, the picaresque novel, and the Gothic novel: Richardson, Fielding, Sterne, Austen.
Historically or thematically organized examination of 19th-century British novelists, with emphasis on the historical novel, the social novel, and novels by women: Scott, Dickens, the Brontes, Eliot, Hardy.
Historically or thematically organized examination of the 20th-century British novel, with emphasis on impressionism; the revolt against naturalism; the experimental novel; the anti-modernist reaction: Conrad, Joyce, Woolf, Lawrence, Drabble, Rhys.
The short story as a genre; its historical development, techniques, and formal character as a literary form. European as well as American writers.
Historically, formally, and thematically focused study of novels and short stories in the detective fiction genre.
Historically or thematically organized examination of the rise and development of the American novel from its beginnings; Hawthorne,Melville, Twain, James, and others.
Historically or thematically organized examination of important American novelists from 1900 to the present: authors may include Willa Cather, Nathanael West, William Faulkner, Ralph Ellison, Zora Neale Hurston, Thomas Pynchon, Ishmael Reed, Maria Helena Viramontes, Rachel Kushner, and others.
Examination of major novels arranged thematically. Topics might include Bildungsroman, stream-of-consciousness novel, Gothic novel, historical novel.
Study of modern film (1930 to present) as a storytelling medium.
Cultural and aesthetic history of film making from its origins in the 1890's through 1945. ENL 161A & ENL 161B need not be taken in sequence.
Cultural and aesthetic history of film making from its origins in the 1890's through 1945. ENL 161A & ENL 161B need not be taken in sequence.
Film theory and criticism, with a study of ten major works of international film art.
Literary Study in the British Isles: On-site study of the literature, film, and/or performance of the British Isles. Taught abroad.
Texts and writing practices in the production of scientific knowledge.  Surveys the literary structure of scientific arguments; history of scientific genres; rhetoric and semiotics in scientific culture; graphical systems in the experimental laboratory; narratives of science, including science fiction. 
Intensive examination of various topics expressed in poetry from all periods of English and American literature. 
Close reading of contemporary American poems on the theme of love and desire by poets of diverse ethnicities and of gay, lesbian, and heterosexual orientations.
African American poetry in the 20th-century, including oral and literary traditions. Authors covered may include Gwendolyn Brooks, Countee Cullen, Robert Hayden, and Langston Hughes.
Historical Study of American poetry since 1900, with thematic and formal focus at the instructor's discretion.  
Selected readings from the Old Testament illustrating various literary forms. Emphasis on the Pentateuch, the Historical Books, and the Wisdom Books. May be taken independently of ENL 171B.
Selected readings from the Old Testament prophets and the New Testament. May be taken independently of ENL 171A. 
Critical approaches to the study of video games, focusing on formal, historical, and cultural modes of analysis. History of software and hardware in North American and global contexts. Relations of games to society, politics, economics, literature, media, and the arts.
Literary modes and methods of science fiction. Representative texts, authors, and themes of the genree.g., time travel, alternative universes, and utopias. Relations of science fiction to science, philosophy, and culture.
American humorous vision of man, nature, and the supernatural. Includes one or more of the following: colonial humor; southwestern and New England humor; pre- and post-Civil War masters; local colorists; journalistic gadflies; anti-provincialists; modernist poets and prose writers; black humor.
In-depth study of an author's works; historical context; relation to predecessors and contemporaries; critical reception; influence.
Literary productions of a local, regional, national, transnational, or other geographical formation; e.g., the global South; literature of Hawaii; literature of Australia.
Writings by American authors of diverse races and ethinicities (African American, Asian, Jewish, Latin American, Native American, and mixed ancestry) clarifying the roles of story-telling and cultural heritage in constructing identity, experiencing displacement, recovering history, and cultivating an inclusive society.
Historical backgrounds and development of types of children's literature, folklore and oral tradition, levels of interest, criticism and evaluation, illustration and bibliography.
African American literature from the colonial period to 1900. Particular attention to the rapid development of the African American literary culture from a primarily oral tradition to various literary genres, including the slave narrative.
Major African American writers in the context of cultural history from 1900 to the present. Writers may include Richard Wright, Ann Petry, James Baldwin, Ralph Ellison, Paule Marshall, Toni Morrison, Alice Walker, Clarence Major.
Focus is on the diverse contributions to the rise of California literature. Reading of poetry, fiction, and essays. Emphasis on 19th- and 20th-century naturalists, turn of the century novelists, the Beats, and writers of the last two decades.
Theoretical, critical, and literary issues informing the study and teaching of American young adult literature.
Historical and/or thematic survey of topics in writing about the environment.
Women's Writing in English before 1800; organized by period, place, genre, or theme.
Women's Writing in English from 1800 to 1900; organized by period, place, genre, or theme.
Women's Writing in English after 1900; organized by period, place, genre, or theme.
Historically or thematically focused intensive examinations of gender and sexuality in British and American literature. 
Group study of a topic centered on the relationships between literature and film or other moving-image media.
Intensive examination of theories addressing a particular problem, topic, or question.
Intensive, focused study of literature at an advanced level. May be organized by topic, author, period, movement, or genre. High participation.
Internships in fields where students can practice their skills. A maximum of 4 units is allowed toward the major in English. May be taught abroad.
Preparation for writing an honors thesis in ENL 195H. High level of participation expected.
Preparation of a thesis, under the supervision of an instructor. Students satisfying requirements for the general major or the teaching emphasis write on a scholarly or critical subject; creative writing students submit a volume of poems or fiction.
Leading of small voluntary discussion groups designed to develop reading and writing skills and affiliated with one of the university's regular courses. 
Field experience, with individuals or in classroom in instruction of English language, literature, and composition. Does not fulfill requirement for major. 
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.
Student facilitated course intended primarily for upper division students.
Group study closely tied to the texts and periods studied in ENL 163S. Investigations of historical sites, museums, galleries, and performances. May be taught abroad in London.
Under the supervision of a faculty member, an undergraduate student plans and develops the course they will offer under 098F/198F.
Introduction to literary scholarship with special attention to the elements of professionalism and to different modes of literary investigation.  
A study of the poem and the Heroic Age of Germanic literature. 
Content varies according to specialty of instructor.  
Varied topics, including the 19th-century novel, contemporary Irish poetry, rise of the drama, or a study of a major author.
Theories of fiction as they relate to the professional writer's practice of the craft. For students in the Creative Writing Program. 
Theories of poetry as revealed in structure, prosody, and idiom of British and American poems, variably approached-through intensivestudy of a single poet, historically, or theoretically-at the instructor's discretion. For students in the Creative Writing Program. 
Varied topics in the study of literature and literary culture craft and poetics from the perspective of the writer/practitioner.
Advanced topics in literary theory and criticism. Preparation and evaluation of research paper. 
Emerging global, international or transnational techniques, theories, and individual works of contemporary world prose or poetry. Discussion, seminar reports, research papers. 
Study of a topic centered on film or other moving-image media. Course materials to be selected by the instructor. Preparation and evaluation of research papers.
Training in preparing an article for publication. Participation in group discussions of article drafts.
Writing that falls outside the generic confines of traditional genres (fiction, poetry, and nonfiction) or traditional workshop formats.  Evaluation of written materials and individual student conferences.
Writing of prose fiction. Evaluation of written materials and individual studentconferences.
Writing of literary non-fiction, with emphasis on autobiography, biography, memoir, the occasional or nature essay, or other non-fiction prose narratives.
Writing of poetry. Evaluation of written materials and individual student conferences.
Designed for new instructors of ENL 005F or ENL 005P; discussion of ways to facilitate creative writing workshops and to respond to student manuscripts.
Designed for new instructors of  ENL 003 or the equivalent courses; discussion of problems related to teaching literature and composition to lower division students.

Supervised work experience in endocrinology.
Endocrinology research.
Participation with members of subspecialty service in the initial evaluation, work-up, management and follow-up of patients with endocrinologic disorders.
In-depth experience in assessment and monitoring of nutritional support of patients whose illnesses are complicated by malnutrition and of patients with problems in under-nutrition due to various illnesses.
First- or second-year students observe in morning Endocrine and Diabetes clinics; attend bi-weekly noon and afternoon endocrine conferences. Present brief endocrine physiology oral presentation to the endocrine group.

Freshman seminar course for indepth examination of a special topic within the subject area. 
Work-learn experience on and off campus in all subject areas offered by the department, supervised by a member of the faculty.
Biology, anatomy, physiology, development, classification, ecology and relation of insects to human welfare. 
Anatomy, development, population ecology, methods of collecting, classification and identification of insects of all orders and of major families. 
Study of the basic external and internal structures, organs and tissues of insects, with emphasis on functional systems. Functional anatomy, histology and fine structures of important organs and tissues will be discussed.
Processes by which insects maintain themselves, reproduce, and adapt to environment. Insects as models for basic/applied research through detailed analysis of metabolic, physiological, and behavioral processes. Emphasis on analysis of methodology, fact, and theory.
Principles and methods of systematics, with particular reference to insects. Emphasis on different theories of classification, and analysis of phylogenetic relationships. 
Basic principles and mechanisms of insect behavior and ecology. An evolutionary approach to understanding behavioral ecology of insects.
Introduction to insect ecology combining fundamental concepts and questions in ecology with ideas, hypotheses and insights from insects. Integrates aspects of individual, population, community and ecosystem ecology. 
Survey of the diversity of insects from selected ecological zones in California with emphasis on collection, identification, and natural history. 
Study of insects in their natural habitats; their identification and ecology.
Development of the ecological basis for the integrated pest management paradigm with emphasis on agriculture. Ecological and practical aspects of control tactics. Laboratory emphasizes identification of pests and beneficials of agriculture and urban situations.
Sustainable management & ecology of arthropod pests in agricultural systems. Techniques for effective, management of arthropod pests via in-depth knowledge about pest biology, life strategies, spatial ecology, and food web functions. Lab & field trip exercises in applied research in pest management, ecology, and evolution using digital technologies (apps, remote sensing, cloud-based decision support).
Biology, ecology and taxonomy of freshwater macroinvertebrates, including insects, crustaceans, molluscs, worms, leeches, flatworms and others. Adaptations to life in freshwater. Aquatic food webs. Uses of macroinvertebrates in water quality monitoring. Field trips during regular lab hours. 
Collection of aquatic insects and identification to the Family level. Collections will require two, one-day weekend field trips (by arrangement). Collection requirement is 40 Families.
Nature, origin, determinants, and limits of longevity with particular reference to humans; emphasis on implications of findings from non-human model systems including natural history, ecology and evolution of life span; description of basic demographic techniques including life table methods.
Analysis of interactions necessary for viruses to infect plants.Interactions among insect vectors and host plants involved in the plant-virus life cycle. Evolutionary aspects of the molecular components in viral infection and modern approaches to the interdiction of viral movement.

Basic biology and classification of medically important arthropods with special emphasis on the ecology of arthropodborne diseases and principles of their control. Relationships of arthropods to human health. 
Lectures on the biological and ecological aspects affecting host-parasite relationships using selected examples from protozoan and metazoan fauna.
Laboratory demonstrations using selected examples of protozoan and metazoan organisms along with various techniques used in parasitology to exemplify concepts presented in the lecture course. 
Arthropods, their general biology, succession, developmental cycles and population biology in matters of criminal prosecution and civil litigation. Emphasis on basic arthropod biology, ecological and developmental concepts and methods, development of reasoning abilities, implication, development of opinions and evidence. 
Experimental design in field ecology. Examination of primary literature, experimental design, independent and collaborative research, analysis of data, development of original research paper based on field experiments.
Experimental design in field ecology. Examination of primary literature, experimental design, independent and collaborative research, analysis of data, development of original research paper based on field experiments.
Laboratory experience or fieldwork off and on campus in all subject areas offered in the Department of Entomology. Internships supervised by a member of the faculty.

Molecular biological analysis of insect systematics, physiology, and defense mechanisms. Molecular biology of insect viruses. Baculovirus expresion vectors and post-translation modification of expressed polypeptides. Biological control of using neuropeptides and toxin genes in insect viruses. 
Vector-borne infectious diseases especially as they relate to changing patterns associated with climatic changes, trade and population movement.
Field course conducted over spring break and four weekends at Bodega Bay, emphasizing student projects. Ecological hypothesis testing, data gathering, analysis, and written and oral presentation of results are stressed.
Principles and current issues in biological control of arthropod pests and weeds; laboratory devoted to identification and life history of the major groups of parasitic and predaceous arthropods.
An analysis of several anthropod-borne human diseases with emphasis on the relationships of the biology of the vector to the ecology of the disease. Discussion includes demonstration of vectors and techniques. 
Discussions of parasitology, ecology and epidemiology related to vectors of pathogens causing disease in humans and animals.
Analysis of contemporary advances in insect physiology, biochemistry and/or behavior. Interpretation and description of physiological and behavioral mechanisms and functions. Application of general principles to solution of problems in the laboratory and field.
Discussion of advances in insect biotechnology, including genetic engineering and genomics.
Discussions of advanced topics in ecology, evolution and systematics with emphasis on analysis of factors influencing the distribution, abundance, adaptations and evolutionary relationships of insects. Includes consideration of applications of basic theory; e.g. biological control.
Discussion of advanced topics about the biology, ecology, behavior, and management of pest and beneficial insects.
Introduction to rational decision making for public policy problems. Modeling natural/human system interactions, data gathering and hypothesis testing. Predicting outcomes of policy options.
Method and practice, philosophical basis, and political role of policy analysis. Reviews basic concepts from economic theory; how and why environmental problems emerge in a market economy; and tools necessary for solving environmental problems. 
Introduction to selected theories of the policy process and applications to the field of environmental policy. Develops critical reading skills, understanding of policy theory, and an ability to apply multiple theories to the same phenomena.
Roles of legislatures, agencies, and courts in creating and interpreting law; legal strategies for addressing environmental problems; major environmental statutes; and the relationship between federal and state/local legal authority.
Teams of students analyze an environmental policy problem from scientific, legal, and economic perspectives. Hands-on learning partnering with rotating clients.
Individually designed supervised internship, off campus, in community or institutional setting. Developed with advice of faculty mentor. 
Practicum experience integrating coursework into an applied professional setting.
Weekly seminar inviting policy and management professionals to come and discuss their challenges and achievements.
Weekly seminar inviting policy and management professionals to come and discuss their challenges and achievements.
Foundations in probability for epidemiologists. Emphasis on properties of and relationships between distributions and application of probability concepts to epidemiology. Includes a mathematical skills laboratory to assist in solution of epidemiologic problems.
Provides the mathematical statistics foundation for statistical models, methods, and data analysis.
Introduces statistical models, methods, and data analysis in the areas of generalized linear model and survival analysis methodology.
Provides the mathematical statistics foundation for statistical models, methods, and data analysis.
Introduces statistical models, methods, and data analysis in the areas of generalized linear, survival, and correlated data methodology.
Basic epidemiologic concepts and approaches to epidemiologic research, with examples from veterinary and human medicine, including outbreak investigation, infectious disease epidemiology, properties of tests, and an introduction to epidemiologic study design and surveillance.
Builds on concepts presented in EPI 205. Concepts of epidemiologic study designclinical trials, observational cohort studies, case control studiesintroduced in EPI 205A are covered in more depth, using a problem-based format. Discussion of published epidemiologic studies.
In-depth integration of advanced epidemiological concepts. Theory, methods, and applications for observational studies including random and systematic error, confounding, counterfactuals, causal inference, effect modification, internal and external validity, estimability, and interpretation of effect measures, and advanced study designs.
Application of theory and concepts of statistics and epidemiology to analysis and interpretation of data typically found in veterinary and human epidemiologic research.
Design and development of research protocols and funding applications for peer review. Application of research methods data collection and management and statistical analysis in research proposals. Methods of evaluating research proposals, mechanisms of funding, specifying human subjects considerations.
Techniques of model building and simulation of infectious diseases will be explored. Epidemiologic modeling philosophy, construction and validation will be emphasized.
Geographic Information Systems (GIS) and spatial statistics. Students are expected to complete a term project based on their graduate research.
An in-depth study of topics in epidemiology theory and methods, selected from: causal inference, confounding, study design, or other related areas, with year to year variation.  Readings are assigned and students are expected to lead discussions on them.
Mixed models for longitudinal data (LD)/repeated measurements; Mean and covariance models; General linear LD models; Random coefficients models; Linear mixed effects models for continuous outcome; Generalized linear mixed effects model for discrete outcome including binary, ordinal and count data.
Systematic review, standard and advanced statistical methods for meta-analysis and syntheses of knowledge and evidence. Quantitative analysis of published data, primarily in aggregate form. Students demonstrate skills in study design, protocol, analysis, and results reporting through presentation of drafted first author paper.
Overview of the modern field of molecular epidemiology. Integrates molecular biology into traditional epidemiologic research by identifying pathways, molecules and genes that influence the risk of developing disease. 
Infectious disease epidemiology and prevention, with emphasis on human and veterinary diseases of global health importance. Major global health epidemics and challenges of infectious diseases, by mode of transmission.
Provide an overview of common advanced statistical methods as well as a treatment of how to use SAS to implement them. Learn the ideas of reproducible research and reporting of statistical analyses.
Critical thinking in Epidemiology.
Examination of the human health effects and the risk of disease from community, occupational, and personal exposure to toxic substances.
Social determinants of health; psychosocial and physiological pathways; health and social inequality; gender and racial/ethnic disparities in health; social support, social cohesion and health; social gradient in behavioral risk factors; social ecological approaches to health intervention; interventions addressing social determinants.
Methods used in epidemiologic research on occupational hazards. Topics include design and analysis of cohort and case-control studies, sample size, measuring dose, choosing a control group, validation of employment and health data, interpreting negative studies, and analysis software.
We will cover the underlying concepts essential to understanding cancer epidemiology, such as trends in incidence and survival, epidemiologic methods used to assess cancer etiology, prevention and control, and an introduction to the cancer initiation and progression multi-stage model.
Theory of epidemics and mathematical modeling concepts for infectious diseases to include discrete and continuous time models, their use to explore disease dynamics and investigate prevention and control strategies for human and veterinary infectious diseases.
Introduction to SAS, an integrated software system for data retrieval and management, data manipulation and programming.
Work experience off and on campus in resource sciences. Internship supervised by a member of the faculty.
Primarily for lower division students.
Student-facilitated (taught) course intended for lower division students.

Topics include hydrology (surface and ground water), hydraulic flow through porous media, water in the soil-plant-atmosphere continuum, water quality, flow through open channels, and representative water-resource problems.
Instrumentation and methods for environmental and ecological monitoring; GPS, sensors, datalogging, and GIS. Wide range of measurement techniques for environmental parameters. 
Estimation of evapotranspiration (ET) for irrigation management and water resources planning; including the basic principles and key factors controlling evaporation and ET rates, methods of measuring these factors in the field and remotely, and determination of likely water requirements for crops and various landscape conditions as needed for water resources planning.  
Relationships among climate, hydrology, biogeochemical cycles, soils and vegetation distribution in diverse landscapes and biomes. Emphasis on physical, chemical, and biological processes affecting ecosystems from the poles to the equator, and human impacts on the environment.
Role of water as an essential natural resource in contemporary society. Aspects of the scientific method, including descriptions of natural phenomena and underlying physical causes. Water for cities, agriculture, industry, wildlife and recreation; case studies of water management.
Degradation of the atmospheric resource, historical aspects and effects of air pollution examined. Evaluation of primary gaseous and particulate pollutants and discussion of their impact.
Fire regimes and roles in major North American vegetation types, especially in the west. Physics of fire, fire effects on organisms and ecosystem functioning, reconstructing fire histories, fire in resource management, and fire use by indigenous people. 
Biological structure and function of trees as organisms; understanding of forests as communities and as ecosystems; use of forests by humans; tree phenology, photosynthesis, respiration, soil processes, life histories, dormancy, forest biodiversity, and agroforestry.
Basics of remote sensing and photogrammetry, grids and map projections, aerial photo interpretation, sensors and platforms for aerial and space photography and non-photographic imaging systems, aerial thermography, microwave sensing, and introduction to remote sensing applications.
Overview of satellite, airborne, and ground-based remote sensing, building on properties of electromagnetic radiation. Applications include hydrologic processes, weather and climate, ecology and land use, soils, geology, forestry, and agriculture. Computer based analysis and visualization of images and processing techniques.
Work experience off and on campus in resource sciences. Internship supervised by a member of the faculty.
Independent study, guided research on an environmentally related subject of special interest to the student. 
Practical aspects of environmental improvement through integrated analyses of contemporary issues or problems associated with advocacy, regulation, science and resource management from the perspectives of the physical and ecological sciences and current policy/management. 
Student-facilitated (taught) course intended for upper division students.

Under the supervision of a faculty member, an undergraduate student plans and develops the course they will teach under 098F/198F.
Student facilitated. Under the supervision of a faculty member, an undergraduate student teaches a course under 098F/198F.
Analysis of the physical, biological, and social interactions which constitute environmental problems. Emphasis on analysis of environmental problems, the consequences of proposed solutions, and the interaction of environmental science and public policy in creating solutions. 
Science behind environmental issues, and policies affecting our ability to solve domestic and international environmental problems. Resources, environmental quality, regulation, environmental perception and conservation. Integrative case studies.
Work experience off and on campus in all subject areas offered in the College of Agricultural & Environmental Sciences. Internship supervised by member of the faculty.
Primarily for lower division students.
Theoretical and experimental analysis of the distribution, growth andregulation of species populations; predator-prey and competitive interactions; and the organization of natural communities. Application of evolutionary and ecological principles to selected environmental problems.
Theoretical & experimental analysis of the distribution, growth & regulation of species populations; predator-prey & competitive interactions; and the organization of natural communities. Application of evolutionary & ecological principles to selected environmental problems.
Interdisciplinary study of diversity and change in human societies, using frameworks from anthropology, evolutionary ecology, history, archaeology, psychology, and other fields. Topics include population dynamics, subsistence transitions, family organization, disease, economics, warfare, politics, and resource conservation.
Application of physical and chemical principles, ecological concepts, and systems approach to policy analysis of atmospheric environments, freshwater and marine environments, land use, energy supplies and technology, and other resources.
Examination of critical environmental issues occurring in coastal waters including the effects of climate change, overfishing, and other human impacts. Through readings and group discussions, students will develop an integrative understanding of the oceanographic and ecological processes.
Advanced oceanographic topics: Chemical, physical, geological, and biological processes; research methods and data analysis; marine resources, anthropogenic impacts, and climate change; integrated earth/ocean/atmosphere systems; weekly lab and one weekend field trip.
Development of exponential and logistic growth models for plant and animal populations, analysis of age structure and genetic structure, analysis of competition and predator-prey systems. Emphasis is on developing models and using them to make predictions and solve problems.
Development of exponential and logistic growth models for plant and animal populations, analysis of age structure and genetic structure, analysis of competition and predator-prey systems. Emphasis is on developing models and using them to make predictions and solve problems.
Introduces students to methods used for collecting ecological data in field and laboratory situations. Methods used by population ecologists and community ecologists; emphasis on experimental design, scientific writing and data analysis.
Ecology of marine populations and communities living in diverse habitats along the California coast. Hands-on learning using scientific process and tools of the biological trade to address ecological questions arising during field trips. Critical thinking through discussing scientific literature.
Principles governing the conservation of plant species and plant communities, including the roles of fire, exotic species, grazing, pollination, soils, and population genetics; analytic and practical techniques for plant conservation; and introduction to relevant legal, ethical, and policy issues.
Physical and chemical properties of seawater, fluid dynamics, air-sea interaction, currents, waves, tides, mixing, major oceanic geochemicalcycles.
Physical and chemical properties of seawater, fluid dynamics, air-sea interaction, currents, waves, tides, mixing, major oceanic geochemical cycles.
Introduction to the origin and geologic evolution of ocean basins. Composition and structure of oceanic crust; marine volcanism; and deposition of marine sediments. Interpretation of geologic history of the ocean floor in terms of sea-floor spreading theory.
Ecology of major marine habitats, including intertidal, shelf benthic, deep-sea and plankton communities. Existing knowledge and contemporary issues in research. Segment devoted to human use. One weekend field trip required.
Biology and productivity of inland waters with emphasis on the physical and chemical environment.
Limnological studies of lakes, streams, and reservoirs with interpretation of aquatic ecology.
Oceanography of coastal waters, including bays, river plumes, nearshore and estuaries; focus on transport patterns, how they are forced and implications for ecological and environmental problems. Pertinent for students in oceanography, ecology, environmental engineering, geology and hydrology.
Introduction to wetland ecology. The structure and function of major wetland types and principles that are common to wetlands and that distinguish them from terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems.
Modern and classic techniques in wetland field ecology. Emphasis on sampling procedures, vegetation analysis, laboratory analytical procedures, and examples of successful wetland restoration techniques.
Alternative models of public policymaking and application to case studies in the U.S. and California. 
Introduction for non-Law School students to some of the principal issues in environmental law and the judicial interpretation of some important environmental statutes, e.g., NEPA.
Introduction for non-Law School students to some of the principal issues in environmental law and the judicial interpretation of some important environmental statutes, e.g., NEPA.
Compares economic with socio-cultural approaches to understanding the causes of environmental problems and strategies for addressing them.  Includes different approaches to the policy process, policy instruments, and environmental behavior. Applies these principles to several problems. 
Engineering, economic, and systems planning concepts. Analysis and evaluation of energy, air quality and selected environmental attributes of transportation technologies. Strategies for reducing pollution and petroleum consumption in light of institutional and political constraints. Evaluation of vehicle emission models.
Models, data and assumptions behind competing arguments regarding societal response to the prospect of climate change at the state, national and international level from economic, ethical and policy science perspectives.
Overview of U.S. and International ocean and coastal policy, including energy, coastal land-use and water quality, protected areas and species.
Survey of primary energy resources (fossil, renewable, nuclear), energy conversion methods, future energy demand scenarios, and environmental impacts of energy. Overview of energy policy in the U.S. Analysis of policy alternatives for addressing energy-related environmental and national security issues.
Evaluation of alternatives for solution of complex environmental problems; impact analysis, benefitcost analysis, distributional analysis, decision making under uncertainty, and multi-objective evaluation.
Continuation of ESP 168A. Emphasis on examination of the literature for applications of research & evaluation techniques to problems of transportation, air & water pollution, land use, and energy policy. 
Governance of water, including issues of water pollution/quality and water supply. Politics of water decision-making and effectiveness of water policy. Broad focus on federal water policy, with case examples from nationally significant U.S. watersheds.
Analysis of policies designed to conserve species and their habitats. Emphasis on how individual incentives affect the success of conservation policies. Valuation of endangered species and biodiversity. Criteria for deciding conservation priorities.
How cities plan for growth in ways that minimize environmental harm. Standard city planning tools (general plan, zoning ordinance) and innovative new approaches. Focus on planning requirements and practices in California. Relationships between local, regional, state, and federal policy.
Investigation of alternative approaches to public lands management by Federal and state agencies. Role each agency's legislation plays in determining the range of resource allocations.
Exposes students to the economic, political, and legal factors affecting land use and growth controls, and helps students critically evaluate written materials in terms of their arguments and supporting data. May be taught abroad.
Economic concepts and policy issues associated with natural resources, renewable resources (ground water, forests, fisheries, and wildlife populations) and non-renewable resources (minerals and energy resources, soil).
Research methods for analysis of urban and regional land use, transportation, and environmental problems. Survey research and other data collection techniques; demographic analysis; basic forecasting, air quality, and transportation models. Collection, interpretation, and critical evaluation of data.
Introduction to the information resources and methods typically used in environmental impact analysis. Emphasis on how environmental information is applied to planning, environmental regulation, and public policymaking, with case studies from California land use and natural resource policy. 
Introduction to Geographic Information Systems (GIS) by using ArcView for assessment and environmental planning.
Workshops featuring empirical analyses of contemporary environmental problems by multidisciplinary student teams. Guided by faculty and lay professionals, the teams seek to develop an integrated view of a problem and outline a series of alternative solutions. 
First in a two-quarter senior capstone course sequence. Identify projects addressing specific problems and opportunities of sustainable agriculture and food systems, form multidisciplinary teams, and identify and consult with key stakeholders to understand their needs and concerns.
Continuation of ESP 191A. Teams conduct analyses of a specific issue in sustainable agriculture or food systems, prepare a critical assessment of technological, economic, environmental, and social dimensions of options for action and present their results to stakeholders.
Work experience off and on campus in all subject areas offered in theCollege of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences. Internships supervised by a member of the faculty.
Experience in teaching under guidance of faculty member.

Introduction to selected theories of the policy process and applications to the field of environmental policy. Develops critical reading skills, understanding of policy theory, and an ability to apply multiple theories to the same phenomena.
Method and practice, philosophical basis, and political role of policy analysis. Reviews basic concepts from economic theory; how and why environmental problems emerge in a market economy; and tools necessary for solving environmental problems.
Open to graduate and undergraduate students who meet requirementstressed.
Advanced techniques in simulation modeling; optimization and simulation, dynamic parameter estimation, linear models, error propagation, and sensitivity testing. Latter half of course introduces model evaluation in ecological and social system models.
Development of externality theory, market failure concepts, welfare economics, theory of renewable and non-renewable resource use, and political economic models. Applications to policy issues regarding the agricultural/environment interface and managing resources in the public domain.
Introduction to scientific research in environmental policy.Major issues in the philosophy of the social sciences.How to design research that acknowledges theoretical assumptions and that is likely to produceevidence in an intersubjectively reliable fashion with explicit recognition of its uncertainties.

Teaching assistant training practicum.
Work experience off and on campus in all subject areas offered in the College of Agricultural & Environmental Sciences. Internships supervised by a member of the faculty.

Principles of toxicology with a focus on environmental, industrial, and natural chemicals.  Topics include fate and effects of chemicals in organisms and the environment, air pollutants, insecticides, aquatic toxicology, endocrine disruptors, biomarkers and bioassays, and risk assessment.
Properties of toxic chemicals influencing their distribution and transformations; action of environmental forces affecting toxicant breakdown, movement, and accumulation; sources and occurrence of major classes of environmental toxicants.
Properties of toxic chemicals influencing their distribution and transformations; action of environmental forces affecting toxicant breakdown, movement, and accumulation; sources and occurrence of major classes of environmental toxicants.
Sample preparation methods for trace analysis of environmental toxicants. Concept and techniques of advanced analytical instrumentation. Interpretation and use of analytical data.
Biological effects of toxic substances in living organisms.  Metabolism, cellular and tissue targets, mechanisms of action, and pathological effects.
Experimental approaches for assessing the biological effects of toxicants.
Cellular regulation from nutritional/toxicological perspective. Emphasis: role of biofactors on modulation of signal transduction pathways, role of specific organelles in organization/regulation of metabolic transformations, major cofactor functions, principles of pharmacology/toxicology important to understanding nutrient/toxicant metabolism.
Examination of toxic tragedies, their origins, consequences, and effects on toxic regulation.
Introduction to mass spectrometry, including ionization techniques, mass analyzers, interpretation of mass spectra, and applications of mass spectrometry.  Emphasis on fundamental concepts of mass spectrometry necessary to identify and quantify organic molecules. 
Introduction to mass spectrometry, including ionization techniques, mass analyzers, interpretation of mass spectra, and applications of mass spectrometry. Emphasis on fundamental concepts of mass spectrometry necessary to identify and quantify organic molecules. 
Toxic substances, their fate in marine and freshwater systems, and their effects on aquatic organisms, populations, and ecosystems. Emphasis will be on substances and issues of current concern.
Taught at Bodega Marine Laboratory. Effects of environmental and nutritional stress, including pollutants, on development and function in embryos and larvae of marine organisms. Emphasis on advanced experimental methods.
Chemistry and biochemistry of toxins occurring in foods, including plant and animal toxins, intentional and unintentional food additives. The assessment of food safety and toxic hazards.
Role of toxicology in industry research and development, human health and environmental protection, hazard and risk evaluations, risk management and communications, product stewardship, and regulatory compliance. Scientific principles and methods of toxicology in chemical, energy, pharmaceutical, pesticide, biotechnology industries.  
Field trip required. Toxicology of air pollutants in the ambient, indoor, and occupational environments.  Health effects, sources, environmental fates, pulmonary responses, sampling and analyses, and air-quality criteria and standards.  Field trip required.
Current practices of health risk assessment of environmental chemicals using toxicological principles and their application to regulatory control of these chemicals.
Federal and California legislation concerning air and water pollution, pesticide use, food and feed additives, consumer protection, and occupational exposure to toxic substances; roles of federal regulatory agencies; alternatives to government control.
Evaluation of evidence that human health and disease susceptibility result from complex interactions between genes and the environment. Emphasis on cancer, metabolic, cardiovascular, and neurological health outcomes assessed by genotoxicity and toxicogenomic methods.
Exposure component of risk assessment; specifically, the presence and/or formation of toxic substances in environmental media, their movement within and between contaminated media, and the contacts of human populations with those media.
Selected topics presented by students, faculty, or outside speakers covering current research and instructional activities within environmental toxicology. Reports and discussion concerning oral and written presentations, literature sources, and career opportunities.
Weekly conference of advanced research methods and the interpretation of research results.
Work experience off and on campus in all subject areas offered in theCollege of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences. Internships supervised by a member of the faculty.
Specific research project conducted under the supervision of a faculty sponsor. Experience to include experimental design, learning new techniques, data analysis and interpretation of findings.
Specific research project conducted under the supervision of a faculty sponsor. Experience to include experimental design, learning new techniques, data analysis and interpretation of findings.
Continuation of ETX 194HA & ETA 194HB.
Teaching toxicology including conducting discussion groups for regular departmental courses under direct guidance of staff.

Toxic chemicals: selected topics illustrating their occurrence, structure, and the reactions underlying detection, toxicity, fate, andecological importance.
Chemical, biochemical, and molecular mechanisms underlying the adverse effects of toxic chemicals. Students are required to write a grant proposal and participate in a grant review panel.
Principles of microanalysis of toxicants.  Theoretical considerations regarding separation, detection and quantitative determination of toxicants using chemical and instrumental techniques.
Laboratory techniques for microanalysis of toxicants. Separation, detection, and quantitative determination of toxicants using chemical and instrumental methods.
Application of GC/MS techniques to investigate toxic chemicals. Massspectral fragmentations and their application to the structural elucidation. Practical application of GC/MS in current research. Preference given to environmental toxicology graduate students.
General principles of neurotoxicology, the cell and molecular mechanisms and health impacts of specific neurotoxicants and the contribution of neurotoxic compounds to complex eurodevelopmental disorders and neurodegenerative diseases.
Principles of toxicology as applied to chemical action on natural populations, communities, and ecosystems. Physical, chemical, and biological characteristics which influence ecotoxic effects, modeling, and field research. Selected case histories are analyzed and presented in class.
Application of toxicological principles in reproductive studies. Effects of toxicants on the male, female, and developing embryo/fetus. Criticalevaluation of reproductive toxicity studies and development of mechanistic approaches to understanding how chemical exposure can adversely affect reproduction.
Provides students with skills and knowledge for evaluating and applying research on the impact of environmental toxicants on immunological function in human and wildlife populations. 
Classification and chemical properties of pesticides, their mode of action, metabolism and disposition, pesticide resistance, effects on human health and ecological health and methods of risk benefit analyses.
Recombinant DNA technology and its applications.
Foundation in theory and practice of forensic DNA analysis; past, present, and emerging technologies; legal and quality assurance issues. DNA extraction, DNA quantitation, multiplex amplification of STR loci, capillary electrophoresis of amplified products, and analysis of STR typing data.
Comprehensive overview of forensic serology and DNA typing techniques and technologies. Strong emphasis on real-world applications, including preservation and tracking of biological evidence, detection and identification of bodily fluids, and methods to extract, quantify, and type human DNA.
Provides a comprehensive understanding of plant and animal forensic biology in terms of sample collection, preservation, analytical methods, and of the invaluable lines of inquiry these forensic evidence may permit.
Presentation and critical discussion of advanced research methods and interpretation of research results. Designed primarily for graduate students.
Teaching toxicology including conducting discussion groups for regular departmental courses under direct guidance of staff.


Ecological principles with emphasis on humans and their interactions with the environment; how humans affect and depend on natural ecosystems; the future of the Earth's biosphere.
Work experience off and on campus in all subject areas offered in the Department of Evolution & Ecology. Internships supervised by a member of the faculty.

General survey of the origins of biological diversity and evolutionary mechanisms.
General survey of the principles of ecology.
Computational methods and mathematical models used to study ecological phenomena.
Evolution as caused by random mating, genetic drift, natural selection, inbreeding, migration,and mutation in theory and actuality. The resemblance between relatives and consequences of selection for quantitative traits. Application of these ideas to topics such as the evolution of sex.
Statistical inference of evolutionary patterns and processes above the species level. Topics include estimation of phylogenies and divergence times, character evolution, biogeographic history, and rates and patterns of lineage diversification, with an emphasis on the origin of species.
Population growth and density dependence; predation; exploitative, interference and apparent competition; coexistence mechanisms; niches, spatial and temporal variation; stability, diversity, and productivity of food webs; applications to conservation and biological control. Emphasis on quantitative understanding through models, concepts,and empirical evidence.
The structure of the classes and subclasses of vertebrates is describedand interpreted in terms of phylogeny.
Explores fundamental principles in the form and function of organisms, examining how basic properties of size, shape, structure, and habitat constrain ways in which plants and animals interact and cope with their physical surroundings.
How animals use songs, dances, colors, chemicals, electricity and vibrations to communicate. Mechanisms of signal production and detection (sensory systems), theory of information transfer and signal design, and the role of natural selection in shaping communication.
Diversity and classification of angiosperms (flowering plants) on a world scale, and current understanding of the origin of angiosperms and evolutionary relationships and trends within them based on morphological and molecular evidence.
Use of molecular tools to answer fundamental questions in ecology and evolution of natural populations. Use of DNA and protein sequences to measure diversity and natural selection within and between populations and species and application to the fields of ecology and conservation. Hands-on manipulation and analysis of data in R.
Examines the bases of organism movement in terrestrial, aquatic, and aerial environments, emphasizing both the unifying principles underlying locomotion, as well as a range of strategies employed across diverse groups of organisms.
Examination of critical environmental issues occurring in coastal waters including the effects of climate change, overfishing, and other human impacts. Through readings and group discussions, students will develop an integrative understanding of the oceanographic and ecological processes.
Survey of the invertebrate phyla, emphasizing aquatic forms, and focusing on morphology, development, natural history, ecology, and phylogenetic relationships.
Field and laboratory experience with representative members of the major invertebrate phyla discussed in EVE 112. Emphasis on comparative morphology, natural history, ecology, and behavior of living invertebrates. Two field trips required.
Biology, ecology, and evolution of local marine invertebrates with a focus on adaptations to environmental and biological factors encountered on the California coast. Hands-on field and laboratory learning with an emphasis on generating and testing hypotheses.  
Processes affecting the distribution, abundance, and diversity of plant and animal life in the sea.  Introduction to marine habitat diversity and human impacts on marine ecosystems.
The study of the interactions between plants, plant populations or vegetation types and their physical and biological environment.  Special emphasis on California.  Four full-day field trips and brief write-up of class project required.
Origin and evolution of invasive plant species and weeds, reproduction and dispersal, seed ecology, modeling of population dynamics, interactions between invasive species, native species, and crops, biological control. Laboratories emphasize design of competition experiments and identification of weedy species.
Treatment of historical evolution of the biosphere resulting from physical, chemical, and biological influences. Special focus upon changes caused by humans. Topics pertain to biodiversity, resources, conservation, and ecosystem services.  
Introduction to genome-wide nucleotide sequence variation in human populations and computational methods for its analysis. Topics to include forensics, disease gene mapping, and studies of human evolutionary history. Misuses, such as eugenics, and ethical/legal issues will be discussed.
Biological, physical, and human-related aspects of the ecology of low latitudes. Distribution, numbers, and relationships of tropical organisms. Problems of development and conservation in the context of ecological and evolutionary theory.
Introduction to plant fossil record, beginning with invasion of land in the Silurian, emphasizing origin and evolution of major groups and adaptations and changing composition and distribution of floras in relation to plate tectonics and climatic change.
Historical background, philosophical rationale, contemporary approaches, and working rules of biosystematics, including International Code of Zoological Nomenclature.
Movements of terrestrial organisms. The role of geologic, climatic, and biologic changes in the geographic distribution of organisms.
Evolution as an organizing force in natural communities. Coadaptation in trophic and competitive relationships. Ecology of polymorphisms, clines, and speciation.
Comparative analysis of animal development and the genetic basis of morphological diversification.
Use of DNA and genomic sequencing in studies of the diversity of microorganisms. Diversity of microbes, phylogenetics, genome sequencing, comparative genomics, phylogenomics, lateral gene transfer, molecular ecology, metagenomics, and studies of the human microbiome.
The use of computers to solve problems in genetics and evolution.
Experimental design in field ecology. Examination of primary literature, experimental design, independent and collaborative research, analysis of data, development of original research paper based on field experiments. 
Experimental design in field ecology. Examination of primary literature, experimental design, independent and collaborative research, analysis of data, development of original research paper based on field experiments.
Animal adaptations for eating plants, pollinating flowers, dispersing seeds. Plant adaptations to herbivore defense, attraction of mutualists; role of coevolutionary arms race, mutualists and cheaters in plant/animal speciation. Exploration through lectures, original scientific literature, discussions and term paper.
Introduction to research methods in biology. Presentation and discussionof research by faculty, graduate, and undergraduate students.
Student reports on current topics with emphasis on integration of concepts, synthesis, and state-of-the-art research approaches. Reviews of literature and reports of undergraduate research may be included.
Work experience off and on campus in all subject areas offered in the Department of Evolution & Ecology. Internships supervised by a member of the faculty.
Students pursue intensive research under the guidance of a faculty advisor. Students are expected to complete the full three-quarter sequence culminating in the writing of an honors thesis.
Students pursue intensive research under the guidance of a faculty advisor. Students are expected to complete the full three-quarter sequence culminating in the writing of an honors thesis.
Students pursue intensive research under the guidance of a faculty advisor. Students are expected to complete the full three-quarter sequence culminating in the writing of an honors thesis.
Assisting the instructor by tutoring students in a Biological Sciences 2B laboratory. Tutoring is voluntary and is supervised by a Laboratory Teaching Assistant and the Laboratory Coordinator. 

Applications of phylogenetic methods to fields outside of systematics. Core lectures/labs in remedial phylogenetics, phylogeography, conservation and comparative morphology. Special topics vary yearly.
Current status of species concepts, models of speciation, current research on speciation, and relevance of species to conservation biology.  
Critical analysis of the plant fossil record as a source of evidence on origin, evolution, and phylogeny of the angio-sperms, Cretaceous and Tertiary climates, geographic history of modern taxa, and origin of modern vegetation types.
Presentation and discussion of faculty and graduate student research in biology.


Practical experience in the methods and problems of teaching. Includes analyses of texts and supporting material, discussion of teaching techniques and preparing and conducting of laboratory and discussion sections.
Research findings and methods in exercise biology.  Presentation and discussion of research by faculty and students.
Gives freshman or sophomore level students the opportunity to study a special topic in the general area of Exercise Biology in a small class setting.
Work experience in the application of physical activity programs to teaching, recreational, clinical or research situations under department faculty supervision.  
Assisting the professor by tutoring students in exercise biology course-related projects.  
Tutoring in the community in exercise biology related projects under the guidance of the faculty. 


Physiology of Exercise; acute responses and adaptations to training.  Neuromuscular function; bioenergetics; metabolic responses to acute exercise; adaptation to trainings; cardiorespiratory; and, applications to environmental physiology, and human health.
Theoretical and practical issues in motor learning, sport psychology, and exercise psychology are examined. Emphasis is placed on how motor skills are acquired and retained, and on the application of social psychology and human motivation studies to human performance.
Principles and analytical procedures for assessing fundamental physiological, biomechanical, motor learning and motor control factors which underlie human movement and performance.
Detailed study of the gross anatomical structure of the human body, with emphasis on function and clinical relevance to students entering health care professions.
Detailed study of prosected human cadavers in small group format with extensive hands-on experience.
Exercise metabolism, with emphasis on skeletal muscle and cardiac muscle metabolism during activity and inactivity. Basics of bioenergetics, substrate utilization, and cell signaling; mechanisms that regulate these properties, and differences between skeletal muscle and cardiac muscle metabolism.
The effects of thermal, barometric and gravitational conditions on physiological function and physical performance of humans.  Acute and chronic effects, emphasizing physiological adaptations and limitations, will be studied.
Physical activity as a therapeutic modality in normal and diseased populations (cardiovascular, pulmonary, diabetic). Effects of exercise and inactivity in terms of normal physiology, pathophysiology, and therapeutic benefit. Exercise fitness and disease assessment methods.
Biomechanical bases of human movement investigated; topics include musculo-skeletal mechanics, tissue mechanics, electromyography,locomotion.
The role of nutrition and exercise in modifying metabolism, body composition, performance and health of humans.
Etiology of and standard therapy for various diseases associated with inactivity and aging; e.g., cardiovascular, pulmonary, diabetes, obesity, lipemias, etc. Exercise will then be considered as a protective and/or therapeutic modality.
Advanced study and consideration of major theoretical and practical issues in sport psychology. Emphasis on practical application to sport and human performance.
Physical activity is evaluated in terms of its ability to enhance the quality of life. Topics studied include:  individual factors (self concept, type A); special populations (elderly, cardiovascular); and mental health changes (depression, anxiety).
Molecular mechanisms underlying adaptation to training. Learn how to exercise to maximize their own performance as well as learning how the frequency, intensity and timing of exercise and nutrition affect the molecular signals that underlie performance.
Factors which affect control of movement from neuropsychological, physiological, behavioral, and mechanical viewpoints. Topics include central vs. peripheral control mechanisms, open and closed loop theories, motor programming, cognitive learning strategies, and the effects of biochemical and biomechanical influences.
Theory and practice of exercise testing applied to older adult populations. Physiological responses to and limitations of exercise testing. Application of exercise testing and training to healthy and diseased populations.
Testing symptomatic and asymptomatic older adults for functional aerobic capacity, body composition, blood lipids, pulmonary function, and cardiovascular disease risk. Counseling adults in appropriate exercise programs and lifestyle modifications. Two quarters minimum; third quarter permitted. (Former course PHE 148L).
Lectures by leading authorities and discussion of the latest research in newly emerging areas in exercise biology. Offered every fourth year.
Compare and contrast exercise science issues between the US and an international location. Identify political, economic, cultural, technological and environmental issues that impact human exercise, physical activity, wellness, and sport from a global perspective.  
Research findings and methods in exercise biology. Presentation and discussion of research by faculty and students.
Work experience in the application of physical activity programs to teaching, recreational, clinical or research situations under program faculty supervision. Written report required.
Completion of individual honors research project in Exercise Biology, under the guidance of an Exercise Biology faculty advisor, culminating in written honors thesis.
Assisting the instructor by tutoring students in exercise biology course-related projects.  
Tutoring in the community in exercise biology related projects under the guidance of the faculty.  


Advanced course on integrated responses of the cardiovascular and respiratory systems to exercise.  Includes hemodynamic, neurohormonal, and autonomic aspects of cardiac and vascular function, principles of myocardial metabolism, and mechanisms underlying changes in pulmonary function and gas transport.
Directed group study.
Directed group study.
Students must apply and interview with the Board of Clinica Tepati or Imani Clinic. Field experience exposes lower division students to health care delivery, patient histories, physical examinations,health promotion, disease prevention, diagnosis; treatment of episodic,acute,chronic illness; appropriate referral and follow-up.
Students must apply and interview with the Board of Clinica Tepati or Imani Clinic. Field experience introduces students to health care delivery, patient histories and physical examinations, health promotions and disease prevention, diagnosis and treatment of episodic, acute and chronic illness, basic laboratory testing and appropriate referral and follow-up. 
Discusses sociocultural perspectives of underserved populations in California impacting their health; roles of family/interpersonal relationships in making health care decisions; and clinician's perspectives in treating people of cultures which are unfamiliar and/or uncomfortable with Western medicine.
Preceptorship in family practice offered as an introduction to clinicalmedicine. 20 hours or 40 hours per week in a family physician's office, doing patient interviews, historytaking, and performing physical exams.
Learning to strengthen your humanity and remain open-hearted can make the difference between burnout and a fulfilling life. Learn tools for selfcare, healing, finding meaning, strengthening commitment and becoming a true physician.
Understanding of chronic illness, particularly diabetes, participate in patient care, alternative techniques. 
Family medicine clerkship for third year medical students. 
Longitudinal Family Medicine Clerkship runs concurrently with Internal Medicine, Pediatrics and Psychiatry for 32 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. 
Longitudinal Family Medicine Clerkship runs concurrently with Internal Medicine, Pediatrics and Psychiatry for 32 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. 
Longitudinal Family Medicine Clerkship runs concurrently with Internal Medicine, Pediatrics and Psychiatry for 32 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. 
Longitudinal Family Medicine Clerkship runs concurrently with Internal Medicine, Pediatrics and Psychiatry for 32 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. 
Family Medicine Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
Family Medicine Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
Family Medicine Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
Family Medicine Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
Family Medicine Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
Longitudinal Clerkship runs concurrently with Internal Medicine and Psychiatry for 24 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. On-going patient write-ups, rounds, conferences are required.
Longitudinal Clerkship runs concurrently with Internal Medicine and Psychiatry for 24 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. On-going patient write-ups, rounds, conferences are required.
Longitudinal Clerkship runs concurrently with Internal Medicine and Psychiatry for 24 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. On-going patient write-ups, rounds, conferences are required.
Longitudinal component of the third-year primary care curriculum. Attend clinic roughly 18 half-days over the course of the year, working one-on-one with a primary care preceptor.
Longitudinal component of the third-year primary care curriculum. Attend clinic roughly 18 half-days over the course of the year, working one-on-one with a primary care preceptor.
Longitudinal component of the third-year primary care curriculum. Attend clinic roughly 18 half-days over the course of the year, working one-on-one with a primary care preceptor.
Longitudinal component of the third-year primary care curriculum. Attend clinic roughly 18 half-days over the course of the year, working one-on-one with a primary care preceptor.
Longitudinal component of the third-year primary care curriculum. Attend clinic roughly 18 half-days over the course of the year, working one-on-one with a primary care preceptor.
Longitudinal clinic component of the second year of the ACE-PC Program. Start with a four-week immersion experience and then 12 additional half-days over the course of the year, working one-on-one with a primary care preceptor.
Longitudinal clinic component of the second year of the ACE-PC Program. Start with a four-week immersion experience and then 12 additional half-days over the course of the year, working one-on-one with a primary care preceptor.
Longitudinal clinic component of the second year of the ACE-PC Program. Start with a four-week immersion experience and then 12 additional half-days over the course of the year, working one-on-one with a primary care preceptor.
Longitudinal clinic component of the second year of the ACE-PC Program. Start with a four-week immersion experience and then 12 additional half-days over the course of the year, working one-on-one with a primary care preceptor.
Individual directed studies in extended preparation for modified curriculum or to complete a clinical rotation following a leave of absence.
Individual directed studies in extended preparation for remediation of all or part of clinical rotation. Clinical studies to accommodate and satisfy remedial work as directed by the Committee on Student Progress and approved by the course IOR.
Preceptorships with primary care physicians in a variety of settings. Acquisition skills to evaluate and devleop a treatment plan for patients with common medical problems seen by primary care physicians in an out patient setting. 
Visits to community agencies including mental health teams, adult day health centers, a diagnostic and research center, and case management specialists. Observation and participation in MMSE's, patient-family conferences, interdisciplinary team meetings, neuropsychiatric testing and home visit evaluations.
Preceptorship with a family practitioner in a foreign country (Arranged by student contact or with assistance of the Family and Community Medicine Department.) Participate in clinical activities, analyze and report characteristics of the practice.
Comprehensive primary medical care of inpatients on a family medicine hospital service. Available sites are university-based family medicine residency programs and programs within the UC Davis Network of Affiliated Family Medicine Residency Programs.
Comprehensive primary medical care of patients on a family medicine hospital service. Usually includes inpatient and outpatient experience.
Combined inpatient and outpatient elective. Consists of comprehensive primary medical care of patients on a family medicine hospital service and in a family medicine outpatient clinic.
Assigned readings in family practice to increase understanding on selected topics relating to family medicine and primary health care delivery; visits to and written analysis of selected health care programs; and/or exposure to family practice with a community physician preceptor.
Discusses sociocultural perspectives of underserved populations impacting health; roles of family/interpersonal relationships in making health care decisions; the nature of ethnic/racial/socioeconomic health care disparities; and clinicians' perspectives in treating people of cultures which are unfamiliar and/or uncomfortable with Western medicine.
Is disease and infirmity the inevitable consequence of aging? We will spend four weeks exploring this question by reviewing the biology of aging, physiologic changes seen in aged individuals and disease processes commonly found in elderly persons. 
Research in various aspects of the health care delivery system.
Study of a special topic in Film Studies in a small class setting.
Exploration of representations of Italian-American identity in American (U.S.) cinema.  Analysis of both Hollywood and independently produced films, especially as they represent ethnicity, gender, and social class of Italian Americans.
Italian cinema of the 21st century in the context of profound cultural and social changes in Italy since World War II. Productions by representative directors such as Amelio, Giordana, Moretti, Muccino are included.  Knowledge of Italian not required.
Italian cinema of the 21st century in the context of profound cultural and social changes in Italy since World War II. Productions by representative directors such as Amelio, Giordana, Moretti, Muccino are included. Knowledge of Italian not required. May be taught abroad.
Study of an aspect of American film history (such as the silent era; the studio system; U.S. avant-garde cinema), including the influences of technological, economic, regulatory, cultural, and artistic forces.
A study of one or more of the film genres (such as the documentary, the musical, film noir, screwball comedy, or the western), including genre theory and the relationship of the genre(s) to culture, history, and film industry practices.
Survey of the conceptual frameworks used to study film (including semiotics, psychoanalysis, spectatorship, auteur, genre and narrative theories). Historical survey of major film theorists.
History of Russian film; film & social revolution, the cult of Stalin, dissident visions; film & the collapse of the Soviet empire; gender and the nation in Russian film. Taught in English; Russian films with English subtitles.
German Weimar (1919-1933) cinema.  Fritz Lang, F.W. Murnau, and G.W. Pabst among others.  Influence on world-wide (esp. Hollywood) film genres such as film noir, horror, science fiction, and melodrama.
Exploration of German cinema from 1945 to 1980, when the Nazi past was a central theme.  Includes study of postwar "rubble films," escapist "homeland films," and New German Cinema of the 1970s (including films by Fassbinder, Kluge, Syberberg, and Herzog). 
Group study of a special topic in film, focusing on a national tradition, a major filmmaker, or a specific era.  
Group study of a special topic in film, focusing on a national tradition, a major filmmaker, or a specific era.  
Study of a special topic in film studies in a small class setting.
Guided research on a topic in Film Studies in preparation for the writing of an honors thesis in FMA 195H or the creation of an honors project in FMS 196H.  
Writing of an honors thesis on a topic in Film Studies under the direction of a faculty member. 
Creation of an honors film, video, or mixed-media project under the direction of a faculty member.  
Professional responsibilities and ethics, physical evidence concepts, drug chemistry and toxicology, controlled substances and analytical chemistry and instrumentation as practiced in the forensic sciences. First of three courses that, in part, covers the curriculum requirements of the Forensic Education Program Accreditation Committee (FEPAC).
Forensic biology and DNA, microscopy and materials analysis and pattern evidence as practiced in the forensic sciences. Second in a series of three courses which covers the curriculum requirements of the Forensic Education Program Accreditation Committee (FEPAC).
Arson and explosives, quality assurance and accreditation, the law and science interface and court testimony as practiced in the forensic sciences. Third in a series of three courses that covers the curriculum requirements of the Forensic Education Program Accreditation Committee (FEPAC).
Introduction to optical and electron microscopy. Transmission, diffraction, reflection and absorption; polarized light and polarizing crystals; phase contrast. Radiography; image recording, SEM analysis of gunshot residues, paints, glass. EDS, XRF analysis, signal-to-noise ratios, minimum detectable levels and homogeneity.
Analytical methods used in the determination and quantitation of ethanol in biological matrices commonly encountered in cases involving operating a motor vehicle.  
How to write clear, credible forensic science reports and scientific articles, that (a) serve the ends of the justice system, (b) meet their readers varying needs and (c) reflect well on the author. 
Principles of microanalysis of toxicants. Theoretical considerations regarding separation, detection and quantitative determination of toxicants using chemical and instrumental techniques.
Discuss the threats to the security of any kind of evidence that is captured, transmitted, or stored digitally and develop critical thinking and basic knowledge of computer forensic science issues in the evaluation of digital evidence.
Principles, theories, and models of population genetics as they apply to forensic science.  
Review organization/function of the human genome, recent developments, next generation sequencing techniques including the preparation of DNA samples, principles of the new generation sequencing assay formats and biochemical reactions. Includes quality control parameter, and bioinformatic approaches.
Recombinant DNA technology and its applications.
Foundation in theory and practice of forensic DNA analysis; past, present, and emerging technologies; legal and quality assurance issues. DNA extraction, DNA quantitation, multiplex amplification of STR loci, capillary electrophoresis of amplified products, and analysis of STR typing data. 
Comprehensive overview of forensic serology and DNA typing techniques and technologies. Strong emphasis on real-world applications, including preservation and tracking of biological evidence, detection and identification of bodily fluids, and methods to extract, quantify, and type human DNA.
Provides a comprehensive understanding of plant and animal forensic biology in terms of sample collection, preservation, analytical methods, and of the invaluable lines of inquiry these forensic evidence may permit.

Basic principles of polymer science are presented including polymer structure and synthesis; polymerization mechanisms, polymer classes, properties, and reactions; polymer morphology, rheology, and characterization; polymer processing.
Basic concepts and methodologies in the study of plastics. Formation, classification, structure, properties, processing, and formulation. Their application to societal needs, and their impact on society and the environment.
Organic and physical chemistry aspects of polymer syntheses and reactions including polymerization mechanisms, kinetics and thermodynamics for major types of organic high polymers.
Structure, properties and reactions of natural- and man-made fibers; the relations between molecular structure of fibers and their physical properties; interactions of fibers and detergents.
Laboratory methods and procedures employed in qualitative and quantitative analysis of textile fibers and auxiliaries.
Senior thesis on independent problems. Research begun in TXC 180A continued and completed in TXC 180B.
Senior thesis on independent problems. Research begun in TXC 180A continued and completed in TXC 180B.
Tutoring of students in Fiber & Polymer Science courses. Assistance with discussion groups and laboratory sections under supervision of instructor.
Group Study
Special Study
Selected topics of current interest in polymer and fiber sciences. Topics vary each time course is offered.
Selected topics of current interest in polymer and fiber sciences. Topics vary each time course is offered.
Selected topics of current interest in polymer and fiber sciences. Topics vary each time course is offered. 
Teaching assistant, training practicum. 
Introduction to French grammar and development of all language skills in a cultural context with special emphasis on communication. Special 12-week, accelerated, intensive summer session course that combines the work of FRE 001, FRE 002, and FRE 003. 
Continuation of FRE 001.
Continuation of FRE 002.
Review of grammar and vocabulary acquired in the elementary sequence, as well as the study of new grammatical structures and a continuing enrichment of vocabulary through oral work in class, written exercises, readings and compositions.
Continuation of FRE 021 or FRE 021S. Review of grammar and vocabulary, as well as the study of new grammatical structures and a continuing enrichment of vocabulary.
Continuation of  FRE 022 or FRE 022S. Review of grammar and vocabulary, as well as the study of new grammatical structures and a continuing enrichment of vocabulary.


Instruction and practice in expository writing in French, with emphasis on organization, correct syntax, and vocabulary building.
Analysis and evaluation of works representing the main types of Frenchpoetry. Study of French poetic conventions and versification.
Analysis and evaluation of plays representing the main types of Frenchdrama, with emphasis on dramatic structure and techniques.
Analysis and evaluation of works representing main types of French prose, with emphasis on narrative structure and techniques.
Practice in English-to-French and French-to-English translation using a variety of non-literary materials, illustrating different problems and styles.
Understanding of, and extensive practice with, various grammatical structures in French. Lexical-semantic, morphological, and syntactic analysis. 
French language as used in the commercial sphere. Emphasis on proper style and form in letter-writing, and in non-literary composition. Technical terminology in such diverse fields as government and world business.
Introduction to French culture through a historical approach to topics such as the citizen and the state (politics, justice, social security), the nation and centralization, the rise of public education, colonization, class and social relationships.
Introduction to pre- and early-modern French culture through a historical approach to topics such as the feudal system, the rise of the monarchy, the Reformation and religious wars.
Introduction to French culture through a historical approach to topics such as the absolute monarchy, the role of the parlements, the French revolution, and the political regimes of the 19th century.
Survey of modern French culture from the Dreyfus affair to the present day.  Topics may include women and French culture, decolonialization and modernization, education, social welfare and immigration.
Introduction to the sound-inventory of French and practice in phonetic transcription, with a focus on ways in which phonetic contrasts signal grammatical contrasts; spoken forms and spelling; formal differences between the "Standard" and other varieties across the French-speaking world.
Intensive course in creative composition using a variety of techniques and literary styles, patterned on Queneau's Exercices de style. Practice in such stylistic modifications as inversion, antithesis, changes in tense, mood, tonality, etc. The writing of poetry.
Social and cultural life of medieval France as studied through its representation in such literary works as La Chanson de Roland, courtly love lyric, the Arthurian romances of Chrtien de Troyes, Aucassin et Nicolette, selected fabliaux and farces.
Overview of major works and writers with particular attention to the historical context of the turbulent 16th century. Writers to be read may include Rabelais, Marot, Ronsard, Du Bellay, Lab, Marguerite de Navarre, Montaigne, and D'Aubign. 
Literature and intellectual culture of the period between the Renaissance and French classicism.
Literature, culture, and politics in the Age of Louis XIV. 
Literature and philosophy of the French Enlightenment. Readings from such authors as Bayle, Fontenelle, Montesquieu, Voltaire, Rousseau and Diderot.
History of the French roman from the Middle Ages to the Revolution with particular emphasis on the novels of the 18th century.
Major concepts and themes of French Romanticism, such as dream and the supernatural, impossible love, exoticism, revolution, individualism, nature, the mal du sicle, Romantic irony, the creative imagination, the cult of ruin.
Narrative and historical codes of French realist fiction, with emphasis on the representation of history in the realist novel, its depiction of social "realities" such as class and gender, and its relation to the historical situation of post-revolutionary society.
Study of the main poets and poetic movements from the mid-19th to the early 20th century, including Baudelaire, the Symbolists, and the Surrealists.
Overview of post-Second World War French intellectual currents from existentialism to structuralism and deconstructionism. Readings will include Sartre and de Beauvoir, Camus, Lvi-Strauss, Lacan, Barthes, Foucault, Derrida, Kristeva, Sollers, Cixous, and Irigaray.
Novels and theories of the novel, from Proust to the Nouveau Roman and beyond. Readings from among Gide, Sartre, de Beauvoir, Camus, Breton, Beckett, Robbe-Grillet, Sarraute, Simon, Barthes, Duras, Tournier, Perec, Modiano, Guibert, Toussaint.
French and Francophone film from the Lumire Brothers to the present. Topics may include analysis of film form and narrative, major filmmakers and filmic traditions, and film theory.
Post-Independence Black African and/or Caribbean and/or North African literatures written in French. Selected topics include: identity & subjectivity, the role of the intellectual, women's voices, languages & oral literatures, cultural syncretism, theories of post-colonialism.
Relationship between French literature and other arts-painting, music, cinema, architecture, opera-from different periods.
Representation of Paris in 19th- and 20th-century texts and its importance in defining the experience and art of modernity.
In-depth study of a particular topic in French culture. Topics may include the Court of Louis XIV, the French Revolution and Immigration.
In-depth study of a particular topic in French culture. Topics may include the Court of Louis XIV, the French Revolution and Immigration.
French theater as literature and performance. 
Thematic, theoretical and political tendencies in contemporary French fiction. Barthes, Foucault, Duras, Guibert, considered in terms of their writing on identity and gender.
Concentrated study of works of a single author.
Subjects and themes such as satiric and didactic poetry of the Middle Ages, poetry of the Pliade, theater in the 18th century, pre-romantic poetry, autobiography, literature and film, etc.
Introduction to the linguistic study of modern French, with focus on sound structure and form, inflection and derivation.
Introduction to the linguistic study of modern French, with focus on sentence construction and constituency, meaning and discourse functions.
Main periods in development of the French language, from Latin to contemporary popular aspects, with emphasis on relationship between socio-cultural patterns and evolution of the language.
Practical application of the French language through work experience in government and/or business, culminating in an analytical term paper on a topic approved by the sponsoring instructor.
Guided research, under the direction of a faculty member, leading to a senior honors thesis on a topic in French literature, civilization, orlanguage studies.
Writing of an honors thesis on a topic in French literature, civilization, or language studies under the direction of a faculty member.
Tutoring in undergraduate courses including leadership in small voluntary discussion groups affiliated with departmental courses.
Tutoring in public schools under the guidance of a regular teacher and supervision by a departmental faculty member.

Group study on focused topics in French literature and culture. Taught abroad.
Introduction to a range of methodologies and critical practices in the field of French Studies, including literature, culture, and linguistics. Covers basic principles of bibliographic research in the humanities.
Presentation of the main changes in the grammatical structures of French, from Latin to contemporary usage, involving textual analysis and sociolinguistic description.  
Interdisciplinary approach to the study of French and Francophone civilization from the Middle Ages to the present. Content varies by instructor.
Study of Medieval French literature, focusing on a particular period, milieu, literary movement, genre, or theoretical approach.
French humanism in its most varied forms. Although at different times Rabelais and Montaigne will be primarily studied, other leading intellectuals and religious writers will also receive attention.
Works of Corneille, Racine, Molire, and minor dramatists. One or more authors may be covered.
Works of authors such as Pascal, Descartes, Mme de Lafayette. One or more authors may be covered.
Studies of the works of one or more poets of the period.
Not a course in philosophy, but an examination of the role of philosophy in the design and context of literary works. Study of one or more authors. 
Rise of the novel. Study of narrative experiments in the context of the philosophical climate and new literary values. May treat one or more novelists of the period.
Study of the works of one or several novelists and/or short-story writers of the period. 
Study of the works of one or several poets of the period.
Study of the works of one or several writers of the period.
Study of the works of one or several dramatists of the period. 
Study of the works of one or several poets of the period.





Aspects of French and Francophone film from the Lumire Brothers through the present. Topics may include a specific historical period of filmmaking, film theories and the analysis of film form and narrative, and major filmmakers and filmic traditions.
Study of cultural productions (literature,  film, visual arts) by  Francophone peoples  such as found in North Africa, West Africa, the Caribbean, South-East Asia, the Americas, and Metropolitan France.
Theoretical approach to the forms and functions of French, with emphasis on phonology and morphology.  Overview of current linguistic theories and their application to French. Offered in alternate years.
Theoretical approach to the forms and functions of French, with emphasis on syntax and semantics. Overview of current linguistic theories and their application to French. Offered in alternate years.
Questions relevant to the linguistic study of French, such as language acquisition, sociolinguistics, or theoretical examination of structure. Intended for students in French Linguistics and those applying linguistic models to literature or teaching.
Overview of approaches to university-level foreign language instruction and the theoretical notions underlying current trends in classroom practices across commonly taught foreign languages.
 

 


Designed for graduate teaching assistants with emphasis on problems and procedures encountered by teachers of lower division classes at the university. 
Designed for graduate teaching assistants with emphasis on problems and procedures encountered by teachers of lower division classes at the university.

Fundamental principles of food service management, including quantity food preparation, institutional equipment, receiving and storage, service, menu planning, merchandising, and safety. Students will earn food safety certification.
Fundamental principles of food service management, including quantity food preparation, institutional equipment, receiving and storage, service, menu planning, merchandising, and safety. Students earn food safety certification.
Laboratory experience in quantity food production and service.
Principles of quantity food production management: production schedules, portion control, financial management, layout and equipment planning, evaluation of alternative systems, and computer applications.
Work experience on or off campus in practical aspects of food service management, supervised by a faculty member.
Tutoring of students in food service management, assistance with discussion groups or laboratory sections; weekly conference with instructor in charge of course; written evaluations.
Introduction to modes of fresh food preservation including use of chemicals and microbes, heat and energy, control of water and atmosphere, and by indirect approaches such as packaging, hygienic design and sanitation.

Chemical aspects of food composition. Emphasis on the functional properties and chemical reactions of the major components of foods: carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, and water.
Sensory quality, chemical and microbial safety, and nutritional properties of foods. Effects of food processing and preparation on these properties. Selected properties of food commodities.
Fundamentals of thermodynamics and kinetics related to food physical chemistry. Phase behavior, crystallization, water activity and food stability, solubility, aroma volatility, formation of glasses, gels and dispersions, biopolymers and rheology.
Study of basic chemical and physical properties that influence the reactivity and functional properties of components in food systems.
Study of properties of food described in FST 100B.
Technology of the malting, brewing and fermentation processes is integrated with the chemistry, biochemistry and microbiology that determine industrial practices and product quality.
Provides practical working knowledge of analytical methods used in malting and brewing and experience with brewing materials and processes, by analysis of samples that illustrate the range of values experienced in practice and pilot scale brewing.
Theory and application of physical and chemical methods for determining the constituents of foods. Modern separation and instrumental analysis techniques are stressed.
Microorganisms in food safety, spoilage, and production. Food-borne disease agents and their control. Growth parameters of food spoilage agents. Destruction of microbes in food. Food fermentations. The development of microbes as a resource for the food industry.
Microorganisms in food safety, spoilage, and production. Food-borne disease agents and their control. Growth parameters of food spoilage agents. Destruction of microbes in food. Food fermentations. The development of microbes as a resource for the food industry.
Cultural and morphological characteristics of microorganisms involved in food spoilage, in foodborne disease, and food fermentation. Analysis of microbiological quality of foods. May be taught abroad.
Chemical and physical principles that influence functional properties, nutrient content, safety, and sensory aspects of food. Emphasis on the application of these concepts in clinical nutrition.
Critical examination of techniques and theories of sensory measurement of food; measures of consumer perception and acceptance. An introduction to the sensory and cognitive systems associated with the perception of food.
Quality assurance measurement techniques applied to selected food processed products emphasized. Rationale for establishing valid quality assurance programs including selection of samples at critical points. Statistical problems in quality assurance programs used by the food industry.
Quality assurance systems for food industry with essential measurement & analysis techniques and discussion of QA management & control programs. Regulations and audit, as well as the processes for validation and verification of quality of food systems, are emphasized.
Application of the conservation of mass and energy to food processing. Elements of engineering thermodynamics, fluid mechanics, heat and mass transfer. Quantitative analysis through problem solving and simulation.
Laboratory exercises to gain experience with common food processing operations at the bench and pilot plant scales.
Physiology, biochemistry, and genetics of microorganisms important in food fermentations. How microorganisms are used in fermentations and how raw materials are converted into finished fermented foods and beverages.
Physiology, biochemistry, and genetics of microorganisms important in food fermentations. How microorganisms are used in fermentations and how raw materials are converted into finished fermented foods and beverages.
Physiology, biochemistry, and genetics of microorganisms important in food fermentations. How microorganisms are used in fermentations and how raw materials are converted into finished fermented foods and beverages.
Methods of design and analysis for sensory food science. Experimental design strategies. Use of taste panels and consumer testing. Data analysis and computation including the relative merits and limitations of parametric and nonparametic approaches. Modifications for quality assurance.
Composition, structure and properties of milk and products derived from milk. Relates chemical, microbiological, and technological principles to commercial practices in processing of milk and its products.
Principles of physical, chemical and catalytic properties of enzymes and their importance. Purification, characterization, and quantitative evaluation of reaction conditions on activity are stressed. Specificity and mechanism of action illustrated by use of selected enzymes. (Former course BCP 123.)
Laboratory procedures involved in detection, purification and characterization of enzymes. (Former course BCP 123L.)
Critical examination of methods of sensory measurement applied to food and beverage systems; descriptive analysis and consumer tests and their application to quality assurance, product development and optimization.
Chemistry and biochemistry of toxins occurring in foods, including plant and animal toxins, intentional and unintentional food additives. Theassessment of food safety and toxic hazards.
Principles of food packaging. Functions of packaging. Properties of metal, glass, paper and plastic materials and packages. Design, fabrication, and applications of food packaging. Packaging of fresh and processed foods, including fruits and vegetables, dairy foods, beer and wine.
Mechanisms of ice crystallization, interpretation of freezing diagrams, and modes of heat transfer. Food properties at sub-freezing temperatures, refrigeration requirements, and estimation of freezing times. Industrial systems used in freezing foods.
Create, refine, test and present viable ideas for new food products. Activities include trend monitoring, consumer research, idea generation, concept screening, and new product concept presentations. 
Product implementation stage of food product development includingpreliminary product description, prototype development, product testing, and formal presentation of a new product development.
Selected topics presented by students on recent advances in food science and technology. Reports and discussions concerning oral and written presentations, literature sources and career opportunities.
Work experience on or off campus in the practical application of food science.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.

Advanced topics in food chemistry and biochemistry, emphasizing the application of the basic principles of chemistry and biochemistry to food composition, properties, preservation and processing. Chemical structures, interactions, reaction mechanisms and experimental methods are stressed.
Fundamental principles of chemistry and physics are applied to a study of changes in water binding properties and activity, changes in proteins, nutrients, toxic constituents, and other compounds during storage, heating, freezing, dehydrating, and concentrating of food materials.
Principles of food engineering applied to food processing. Relationship of Newtonian and non-Newtonian fluid properties to heat and momentum transfer. Application of mass transfer in controlling kinetics and quality changes of foods.
Principles and recent developments in food microbiology. Mechanisms of foodborne disease, pathogen detection, parameters of microbial growth and control in foods, intestinal microbiology including probiotics and prebiotics, and the microbiology of food and beverage fermentations. 
Use of microorganisms for producing substances such as amino acids,peptides, enzymes, antibiotics and organic acids. Emphasis on metabolic regulation of pathways leading to fermentation products, on yeast fermentations, and on genetic manipulations (including recombinant DNA techniques) of industrial microorganisms.
Basic principles of measurement of color, texture, and flavor of foods by sensory and instrumental methods. Advanced statistical analysis of relation of colorimetry, texturometry, and chemistry of volatile compounds to perception of appearance, texture, flavor.
Relationships of structure of proteins to their biological functions. Structural proteins, complexing proteins, and catalytic proteins in plant and animal materials and products.
Chemistry of lipids as it pertains to research in food and nutrition. Relations between lipid structure and their physical properties in tissues and foods. Regulation of absorption, transport, and metabolism of lipids. Implications of dietary fats and health.
Become familiar with basic principles of flavor chemistry, analysis, and formation in fresh and processed foods. Required to read and critically evaluate flavor chemistry literature.
Advanced study of the techniques and theory of the sensory measurement of food as an analytical tool and as a measure of consumer perception and acceptance. Advanced examination of the sensory and cognitive systems associated with the perception of food.
Compositional and physico-chemical aspects of milk and their implications on cheesemaking; enzymatic, microbiological and physical aspects of cheesemaking; cheese as a biological composite; designing cheese quality attributes; cheese aging. Cheese from all over the world tasted and discussed.
Examination of the anatomy and physiology of the chemical senses (taste, smell, and the trigeminal senses) and how they are involved in the perception of food and food intake.
Impact of specific food structures on the structure and function of the animal gut microbiota. How food is transformed by, and modulates, the gut microbiota to provide the host with nutrients and protection. 
Critical presentation and evaluation of original research by graduate students. Planning of research programs and proposals. Discussion led by individual major instructors for their research group.
Oral presentation of student's original research, discussion, and critical evaluation.


Supervised work experience in gastroenterology.
Work-up, manage, and follow-up new patients on active inpatient consulting service. Gastroenterology/Hepatology patients. Daily rounds with attending physician.
To gain insight in clinical activities of Gastroenterology Division through attendance at any of the following: endoscopic procedures, ward rounds, outpatient clinic, and G.I. grand rounds.
Part-time participation in active clinical and basic research projects. Some will involve both patient care and relevant laboratory procedures. Basic research includes liver metabolism, cancer markers, porphyrias diet and cancer, folate metabolism.
Introduction to the Global Disease Biology major, research and internship opportunities, and potential career paths in human, animal, and plant health. Communication, ethics and the nature of science.
Principles and practice of epidemiology as applied to human, animal, and plant populations and the environment in which these populations co-exist. Quantitative analysis of both infectious and non-infectious disease. Inter-dependence between epidemiological analysis, decision-making and policy formulation will be highlighted.
Principles and practice of epidemiology as applied to human, animal, and plant populations and the environment in which these populations co-exist. Quantitative analysis of both infectious and non-infectious disease. Inter-dependence between epidemiological analysis, decision-making and policy formulation will be highlighted.
Examination of the prevention and treatment of diseases affecting humans, animals, and plants. Case studies will illustrate the merits of a unified approach to promoting health at local, regional, and global scales.
Examination of the prevention and treatment of diseases affecting humans, animals, and plants. Case studies illustrate the merits of a unified approach to promoting health at local, regional, and global scales.
Examination of the structure and function of microbial communities that live inside and on host organisms. Introduction to general concepts of the microbiome and microbiota, and their relationship to host health and disease.
Seminar leading to development of the research proposal and academic plan for the Global Disease Biology major. 
Capstone research experience for the Global Disease Biology major. Project may be experimental, library research, or some other creative activity. 
Course helps prevent or solve problems during the students research activity. Independent advising and assistance on research proposal.
Prevent or solve problems during the students research activity. Independent advising and assistance on research proposal.
Small group discussion and preparation of short papers for GEL 002.
The history of life during the three and onehalf billion years from its origin to the present day. Origin of life and processes of evolution; how to visualize and understand living organisms from their fossil remains.
Small group discussion and preparation of short papers for GEL 003. GE credit with concurrent enrollment in GEL 003: WE.
Exercises in understanding fossils as the clues to interpreting ancient life, including their functional morphology, paleoecology, and evolution.
Exposure to geologic features and earth processes in the field. Experiential instruction in earth-science concepts, spatial visualization, landscape evolution, deep time, critical thinking skills, and integrative scientific themes. One 4-5 day field trip.   
Scientific method applied to discovery of the processes, biota and history of the oceans. Group discussion and preparation of term paper.
Modern ideas about the unifying ideas of fractal geometry, chaos and complexity. Basic theory and applications with examples from physics, earth sciences, mathematics, population dynamics, ecology, history, economics, biology, computer science, art and architecture. Offered in alternate years.
Modern ideas about the unifying ideas of fractal geometry, chaos and complexity. Basic theory and applications with examples from physics, earth sciences, mathematics, population dynamics, ecology, history, economics, biology, computer science, art and architecture. Offered in alternate years.
The Earth, its materials, its internal and external processes, its development through time by sea-floor spreading and global plate tectonics. 
Introduction to classification and recognition of minerals and rocks and to interpretation of topographic and geologic maps and aerial photographs. 
Introduction to interactions between Earth and life with an emphasis on how metabolism, cellular processes, evolution and ecology emerged within natural environments and have changed Earths surface.
Introduction to key geochemical principles in Earth & Planetary Sciences; chemical bonding, geochemical affinity of elements, redox & acid base equilibria in geological systems, radioactive decay, isotopic fractionation and paleoclimate records.
Introduction to geophysical topics essential to all aspects of Earth and planetary sciences: theory of plate tectonics, gravitational field of planets, diffusion, rheology, seismology, and earthquakes.
Physical and chemical properties of rocks, minerals and other earth materials; structure and composition of rock-forming minerals; formation of minerals by precipitation from silicate liquids and aqueous fluids and by solid state transformations.
Physical and chemical properties of Earth materials; structure, chemical composition, and identification of rock-forming minerals; mineral-rock associations, and their origin from silicate liquids, aqueous fluids, and solid state transformations.
Optical properties of inorganic crystals; techniques of mineral identification using the polarizing microscope; strategies for studying rocks in thin section.
Work-learn experience on and off campus in all subject areas offered by the department.  Internships supervised by a member of the faculty.
Directed group study.
Special study for undergraduates.
Study of processes and products of rock deformation. Introduction to structural geology through a survey of the features and geometries of faults and folds, techniques of strain analysis, and continuum mechanics of rock deformation.
Laboratory study of the processes and products of rock deformation. Introduction to the practice of structural geology through observations and analysis of rock deformation, including field measurement techniques and geologic mapping.
Field mapping projects and writing geological reports. Weekly classroom meetings devoted to preparation of maps, cross sections, stratigraphic sections, rock descriptions, and reports. Seven-eight days on weekends during quarter. 
Field mapping projects and writing geological reports. Weekly classroom meetings devoted to preparation of maps, cross sections, stratigraphic sections, rock descriptions, and reports. Seven-eight days for field trips will occur on weekends during the quarter.
Origin and occurrence of igneous rocks. Laboratory exercises emphasize the study of these rocks in hand specimen and thin section.
Origin and occurrence of igneous rocks. Laboratory exercises emphasize the study of these rocks in hand specimen and thin section.
Physical and chemical properties of metamorphic rocks; interpretation of metamorphic environments. Laboratory exercises emphasize the study of these rocks in hand specimen and thin section.
Evolution and ecological structure of the biosphere from the origin of life to the present.
Evolution and ecological structure of the biosphere from the origin of life to the present.
Evolution and ecological structure of the biosphere from the origin of life to the present.
Exercises in determining the ecological functions and evolution of individuals, populations, and communities of fossil organisms in field and laboratory.
Exercises in determining the ecological functions and evolution of individuals, populations, and communities of fossil organisms in field and laboratory.
Exercises in determining the ecological functions and evolution of individuals, populations, and communities of fossil organisms in field and laboratory.
Geological and environmental factors controlling climate change, the greenhouse effect with a detailed analysis of the history of Earth's climate fluctuations over the last 600 million years. Past and present climate records are used to examine potential future climatic scenarios.
Principles of stratigraphic and sedimentologic analysis. Evaluation of historical and modern global changes in sedimentation within terrestrial and marine environments. Examination of the plate tectonic, climatic and oceanographic factors controlling the distribution and exploitation of economic fluids within sedimentary rocks.
Sediment formation, transport, and deposition. Interpretations of sedimentary processes across landscapes and through time in the context of environmental and geological problems. Reconstruction of ancient environmental change from sedimentary rocks.
Methods of stratigraphic and sedimentologic analysis of modern and ancient sediments. Identification of major sediment and sedimentary rock types. Outcrop and subsurface analysis of sedimentary basins. GE credit with concurrent enrollment in GEL 109. Includes four one-day field trips.
Advanced application of geologic and geophysical field methods to the study of rocks. Includes development and interpretation of geologic maps and cross sections; gravity, magnetic, electrical resistivity and seismic surveys; and field analysis of plutonic and volcanic rock suites. Eight hours/day, six days/week for six weeks.
Advanced application of geologic and geophysical field methods to the study of rocks. Includes development and interpretation of geologic maps and cross sections; gravity, magnetic, electrical resistivity and seismic surveys; and field analysis of plutonic and volcanic rock suites. Eight hours/day, six days/week for six weeks.
Advanced application of geologic field methods to the study of deformed rocks and their interpretation in terms of tectonic processes. Includes development and interpretation of geologic maps, cross sections and stratigraphic sections. Six days/week for three weeks in an off-campus location. 
Advanced application of geologic field methods to the study of volcanic and plutonic rocks and their interpretation in terms of igneous processes. Includes development and interpretation of geologic maps, cross sections, stratigraphic sections, and outcrop scale observations. Six days/week for three weeks in an off-campus location.
Advanced application of geologic field methods to a special project location and the interpretation of field observations in terms of its geologic processes and geologic history. Variable field location and specific activities. Six days/week for three weeks in an off-campus location.  
Study of interplay between the Earth and its human inhabitants through history, including consideration of acute events such as earthquakes and eruptions as well as the geology of resources, topography, and water.
Advanced oceanographic topics: Chemical, physical, geological, and biological processes; research methods and data analysis;  marine resources, anthropogenic impacts, and climate change; integrated earth/ocean/atmosphere systems; weekly lab and one weekend field trip.
Origin, occurrence, and distribution of non-renewable resources, including metallic, nonmetallic, and energy-producing materials. Problems of discovery, production, and management. Estimations and limitations of reserves, and their sociological, political, and economic effects.
Nucleosynthesis of chemical elements, physical and chemical properties of elements, ionic substitution, elemental partition, distribution and transport among planetary materials, basic thermodynamics and phase diagrams, isotopic geochronometers, stable isotope fractionation, mixing and dilution, advection and diffusion, geochemical cycles.
Introduction to Earth surface processes with a focus on topics of current environmental interest such as nuclear power and waste disposal, acid mine drainage, carbon sequestration, history of polar ice sheets and sea level change.
Geologic aspects of land use and development planning. Geologic problems concerning volcanic and earthquake hazards, land stability, floods, erosion, coastal hazards, non-renewable resource extraction, waste disposal, water resources.
Integrative multidisciplinary field analysis of streams. Class project examines hydrology, geomorphology, water quality and aquatic and riparian ecology of degraded and pristine stream systems. Includes cooperative two-week field survey in remote wilderness settings with students from diverse scientific backgrounds.   
Principles of physical and chemical volcanology. Taught in a volcanically active setting (e.g., Hawaii) with a strong field component.
Analysis of river form and processes, emphasis on fluvial geomorphology, and river and stream restoration; case studies to illustrate concepts and applications. Two weekend field trips required. Offered irregularly. 
Analysis of river form and processes, emphasis on fluvial geomorphology, and river and stream restoration; case studies to illustrate concepts and applications. Two weekend field trips required. Offered irregularly. 
Quantitative description and interpretation of landscapes with emphasis on the relationships between physical processes, mass conservation, and landform evolution. Topics covered include physical and chemical weathering, hillslopes, debris flows, fluvial systems, alluvial fans, pedogenesis, eolian transport, glaciation and Quaternary geochronology.
Quantitative description and interpretation of landscapes with emphasis on the relationships between physical processes, mass conservation, and landform evolution. Topics covered include physical & chemical weathering, hillslopes, debris flows, fluvial systems, alluvial fans, pedogenesis, eolian transport, glaciation and Quaternary geochronology.
Evolutionary history of vertebrates; fossil record and phylogeny; timing of major evolutionary events; appearance of major vertebrate groups; physical constraints in vertebrate evolution; paleobiogeography of vertebrates; effect of continental movement on vertebrate evolution; dinosaurs and other strange vertebrates. Offered in alternate years.
Evolutionary history of vertebrates; fossil record and phylogeny; timing of major evolutionary events; appearance of major vertebrate groups; physical constraints in vertebrate evolution; paleobiogeography of vertebrates; effect of continental movement on vertebrate evolution; dinosaurs and other strange vertebrates. Offered in alternate years.
Augments lecture GEL 141 through handling of specimens enabling in-person examination of three dimensional features observed in vertebrate skeletons, both fossil and living. Offered in alternate years.
Analysis of sedimentary basins from initiation to maturity, including controls on sedimentary fill, subsidence analysis, sequence stratigraphy, core logs, and applications to petroleum exploration and hydrology. One two-day field trip. Offered irregularly.
Physical and chemical properties of magmatic environments and processes of igneous rock formation. Laboratory study of representative igneous rocks. Offered irregularly.
Physical and chemical properties of magmatic environments and processes of igneous rock formation. Laboratory study of representative igneous rocks. Offered irregularly.
Ancient ecosystems and the factors that caused them to change. Species, expansion, evolution of new modes of life, geologically induced variations in resource supply, and extinction provide historical perspective on the biosphere of future.
Metamorphic processes and the origin of metamorphic rocks. Laboratory study of representative rock suites. Offered irregularly.
Metamorphic processes and the origin of metamorphic rocks. Laboratory study of representative rock suites. Offered irregularly.
Basic principles of nuclear chemistry and physics applied to geology to determine the ages of terrestrial rocks, meteorites, archeological objects, age of the Earth, to trace geological/environmental processes, and explain formation of the chemical elements in the Universe. Offered irregularly.
Tectonic, lithologic and geochemical setting of major metallic ore deposit types emphasizing ore deposit genesis, water/rock interaction and the environmental effects of mining. Offered irregularly.
Use of oxygen and hydrogen isotopes in defining hydrologic processes; carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur isotopes as indicators of exchange between the lithosphere, hydrosphere, atmosphere and biosphere. Radiogenic, cosmogenic, and noble gas isotope tracers. Offered irregularly.
Geology, geochemistry, and geophysics of geothermal systems, including electrical power generation and direct use applications. Includes one day field trip on a weekend during the quarter. Offered irregularly.
Physical and chemical properties of seawater, fluid dynamics, air-sea interaction, currents, waves, tides, mixing, major oceanic geochemical cycles.
Physical and chemical properties of seawater, fluid dynamics, air-sea interaction, currents, waves, tides, mixing, major oceanic geochemical cycles.
Introduction to the origin and geologic evolution of ocean basins. Composition and structure of oceanic crust; marine volcanism; and deposition of marine sediments. Interpretation of geologic history of the ocean floor in terms of sea-floor spreading theory.
Ecology of major marine habitats, including intertidal, shelf benthic, deep-sea and plankton communities. Existing knowledge and contemporary issues in research. Segment devoted to human use. One weekend field trip required. 
Morphology, systematics, evolution, and ecology of single-celled organisms that are preserved in the fossil record. Offered irregularly.
Physical and chemical processes affecting groundwater flow and contaminant transport, with emphasis on realistic hydrogeologic systems. Groundwater geology and chemistry. Fundamentals of groundwater flow and transport analysis. Laboratory includes field pumping test and work with physical and computer models.
Physical and chemical processes affecting groundwater flow and contaminant transport, with emphasis on realistic hydrogeologic systems. Groundwater geology and chemistry. Fundamentals of groundwater flow and transport analysis. Laboratory includes field pumping test and work with physical and computer models.
Introduction to quantitative methods in analyzing geological data including basic principles of statistics and probability, error analysis, hypothesis testing, inverse theory, time series analysis and directional data analyses.  Use of computer in lectures and homework.
Introduction to quantitative methods in analyzing geological data including basic principles of statistics and probability, error analysis, hypothesis testing, inverse theory, time series analysis and directional data analyses.
Geophysical methods applied to determining subsurface structure in tectonics, hydrogeology, geotechnical engineering, hydrocarbon and mineral exploration. Theory, survey design and interpretation of gravity, electrical resistivity, electromagnetic, reflection and refraction seismology, and ground-penetrating radar measurements. 
Geophysical methods applied to determining subsurface structure in tectonics, hydrogeology, geotechnical engineering, hydrocarbon and mineral exploration. Theory, survey design & interpretation of gravity, electrical resistivity, electromagnetic, reflection & refraction seismology, and ground-penetrating radar measurements. 
Theory and use of physics in the study of the solid earth. Gravity, magnetism, paleomagnetism, and heat flow. Application to the interpretation of the regional and large-scale structure of the earth and to plate tectonics. Offered irregularly.
Theory and use of physics in the study of the solid earth. Gravity, magnetism, paleomagnetism, and heat flow. Application to the interpretation of the regional and large-scale structure of the earth and to plate tectonics. Offered irregularly.
Principles of planetary science. Planetary dynamics, including orbital mechanics, tidal interactions and ring dynamics. Theory of planetary interiors, gravitational fields, rotational dynamics. Physics of planetary atmospheres. Geological processes, landforms and their modification. Methods of analysis from Earth-based observations and spacecraft.
Advanced field studies of selected geologic terrains, interpretation and discussion of field observations. Offered irregularly.
Exploration of effective teaching practices based on examination of how middle school students learn math and science. Selected readings, discussion and field experience in middle school classrooms. 
Marine geochemistry with the opportunity of going to sea or into the field on land. Techniques of sea-floor mapping using bottom photography, marine geochemical sampling, and method of data reduction and sample analysis. Analysis of data/samples collected. Offered irregularly.
Exploration and creation of effective teaching practices based on examination of how high school students learn mathematics and science. Field experience in high school classrooms.
Supervised work experience in geology.
Guided independent study of a selected topic, leading to the writing of a senior thesis.
Guided independent study of a selected topic, leading to the writing of a senior thesis.
Guided independent study of a selected topic, leading to the writing of an honors thesis.
Guided independent study of a selected topic, leading to the writing of an honors thesis.
Group study focused on topics in Geology.
Fieldwork over spring break. Application of stratigraphic techniques to research problems. Collection, compilation, and interpretation of field data. Integration of data with models for deposition and interpretations of Earth history. Topics will vary. Offered irregularly.
Topics in advanced methods of stratigraphic analysis, regional stratigraphy and sedimentation, and sedimentary basin analysis. Emphasis on techniques used to interpret stratigraphic record and on current issues in stratigraphy and sedimentation. Offered irregularly.
Active deformation associated with faults, landslides, and volcanoes. Geodetic measurement techniques such as triangulation, trilateration, leveling, Global Positioning System (GPS), and radar interferometry. GPS data acquisition and analysis. Inversion of geodetic data and mechanical models of crustal deformation. Offered irregularly.
Nature and evolution of tectonic features of the Earth. Causes, consequences, and evolution of plate motion, with selected examples from the Earth's deformed belts. Offered irregularly.
Discussion and evaluation of current research in a given area of geophysics. Topic will change from year to year. Offered in alternate years.
Recent advances in the understanding and analysis of structures in brittlely and ductilely deformed rocks. Detailed investigation of the characteristics of the structures, models for their formation, and applications to inferring the kinematics of larger scale tectonics.  Offered irregularly.
Recent advances in the understanding and analysis of structures in brittlely and ductilely deformed rocks. Detailed investigation of the characteristics of the structures, models for their formation, and applications to inferring the kinematics of larger scale tectonics.  Offered irregularly.
Origins of those structures in rocks associated with brittle and ductile deformation. Theoretical analysis, using continuum mechanics, and experimental evidence for the origin of the structures with emphasis on deformational processes in the earth. Offered irregularly.
Origins of those structures in rocks associated with brittle and ductile deformation. Theoretical analysis, using continuum mechanics, and experimental evidence for the origin of the structures with emphasis on deformational processes in the earth. Offered irregularly.
Development in tensor notation of the balance laws of continuum mechanics, and constitutive theories of elasticity, viscosity, and plasticity and their application to understanding development of geologic structures such as fractures, faults, dikes, folds, foliations,and boudinage. Offered irregularly.
Development in tensor notation of the balance laws of continuum mechanics, and constitutive theories of elasticity, viscosity, and plasticity and their application to understanding development of geologic structures such as fractures, faults, dikes, folds, foliations,and boudinage. Offered irregularly.
Advanced petrography and geochemistry of sediments and sedimentary rocks. Geochemical, textural and mineralogical evolution of sedimentary rocks reflecting depositional or burial processes. Laboratory work emphasizes thin section study of rocks.  Offered irregularly.
Discussion and application of stable isotope techniques for scientific research problems. Emphasizes carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, hydrogen and sulfur isotopes. Laboratory develops basic skills of cryogenic gas extraction and specific techniques for individual research using stable isotopes. Offered irregularly.
Critical discussion and review of selected topics in paleoceanography and paleoclimatology relating to the history of the processes controlling and affecting climate change and ocean circulation throughout the geologic record. Topics vary. Offered irregularly.
Impacts of management and land use activities on the geomorphology of rivers and streams. Evaluation and use of analytical tools for river assessment. Assessment of river and stream restoration strategies and emerging issues in river management.    
Modern climate change and linkages between the ocean-atmosphere-cryosphere-terrestrial climate system. Importance of the ocean in forcing climate change, and the impacts of anthropogenic processes on the ocean. Topics vary. Offered irregularly.
Recent advances in the analysis of landforms and their evolution. Detailed investigation of the tools used to document surface processes. Evaluation of concepts and processes that govern landscape evolution. Offered irregularly.
Recent advances in the analysis of landforms and their evolution. Detailed investigation of the tools used to document surface processes. Evaluation of concepts and processes that govern landscape evolution. Offered irregularly.
Inversion of data for model parameters. Evaluation of parameter uncertainties. Linear and nonlinear problems for discrete and continuous models. Bakus-Gilbert inversion. Offered irregularly.
Elastodynamic wave equation. Greens functions and source representations. Ray theory. Plane and spherical waves and boundary conditions. Elastic wave propagation in stratified media.
Physics of the earth's crust, mantle, and core. Laplace's equation and spherical harmonic expression of gravity and magnetic fields. Elastic wave equation in geologic media. Body and surface seismic waves. Equations of state, thermal structure of the earth. Offered irregularly.
Physics of the earth's crust, mantle, and core. Laplace's equation and spherical harmonic expression of gravity and magnetic fields. Elastic wave equation in geologic media. Body and surface seismic waves. Equations of state, thermal structure of the earth. Offered irregularly.
Nature and origin of the Earth's magnetic field. Present field and recent secular variation. Spherical harmonic analysis. Paleosecular variation. Polarity transitions and geomagnetic excursions. Statistics of polarity intervals. Dynamo theory. Planetary magnetism.  Offered irregularly.
Principles and applications of paleomagnetism. Physical basis of rock and mineral magnetism. Field and laboratory techniques. Instrumentation. Analysis of paleomagnetic data. Statistical methods. Rock magnetic properties. Geological and geophysical applications. Offered irregularly.
Physiochemical principles of metamorphic mineral assemblages and methods of interpreting the paragenesis of metamorphic rocks.  Offered irregularly.
Selected topics in metamorphic petrology (e.g., mass transport processes, tectonic settings, geothermometry, thermal structure of metamorphic belts, regional studies). Offered irregularly.
Critical review of selected topics in geochemistry including: ore genesis, hydrothermal and geothermal fluids, recent and ancient sediments, isotope geology, origin and chemistry of the oceans. Subject varies yearly depending on student interest.
Astrophysical context on origin of Solar System, synthesis of chemical elements, condensation sequence, star and planet formation, cosmochronology, building blocks of planets, development on planets' layered structure, atmosphere and hydrosphere and the role of comets/asteroids for volatile delivery. Offered irregularly.
Topical seminar designed to help graduate students develop and maintain familiarity with current and past literature related to igneous rock petrogenesis.
Introduction of modern concepts in chemical thermodynamics and kinetics, and fluid dynamics of magmatic systems for graduate students in petrology. Offered irregularly.
Introduction to techniques and methods of design and executing experiments on Earth-forming minerals and rocks. Problems and examples from igneous and metamorphic petrology will be utilized. Offered irregularly.
Selected problems in paleontology. Subject to be studied will be decided at an organizational meeting. Offered irregularly.
Treat one or more of several topics in paleobiology from a phylogenetic perspective, including major patterns in evolution, building the tree of life, extinction & phylogeny, phylogeny of major phyla, and the relation between taxonomy & phylogeny.
Laboratory research techniques for new graduate students in Geology.  Demonstration of and exposure to appropriate techniques in research.
Marine geochemistry with the opportunity of going to sea or into the field on land. Techniques of seafloor mapping using bottom photography, marine geochemical sampling, and method of data reduction and sample analysis. Analysis of data/samples collected.
Short oral presentations by students and faculty concerning results of their past work and plans for future work in the Sierra. A written abstract is required following the format required at professional meetings. Offered irregularly.
Review and discussion of latest research and fundamental issues surrounding riverine systems, with emphasis on physical processes. Topics vary. Offered irregularly.
Seminar/discussion group to review and discuss recent earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, and other significant geologic events.  The focus is on understanding the available observations, the physical processes behind each event, the geological setting, and societal consequences. Offered irregularly.
Seminar/discussion group to review and discuss latest research in structural geology and tectonics, and on-going research of participants. Topics will vary each quarter depending on the interests of the group. Occasional field trips to areas of current interest. 
Seminar/discussion group to review and discuss latest research in geophysics, and on-going research of participants. Topics will change each quarter depending on the interests of the group. Offered irregularly.
Seminar/discussion group to review and discuss latest research in geophysics, and on-going research of participants. Topics will change each quarter depending on the interests of the group. Offered irregularly.
Seminar dealing with current problems in tectonics of selected regions. Topics will change from year to year. Emphasis on study of recent literature. Offered irregularly.
Seminar/discussion group to review and discuss latest research in geophysics, and on-going research of participants. Topics will change each quarter depending on the interests of the group. Offered irregularly.
Introduction to graduate-level writing and undergraduate-level teaching skills in geology. Persuasive (proposal) writing workshop; discussions on campus teaching resources, presenting information, managing classroom dynamics, evaluating student performance. Participation in teaching program required for Ph.D. in Geology.
Reading and discussion of ethical issues arising in the earth sciences. Topics include scientific misconduct, gender equity in science, authorship of scientific papers, establishing priorities in research, and related issues. Offered irregularly.
Concepts and thematic content of the discipline, including contemporary research questions. A brief review of the history of geographic thought and practice is done at the beginning of the course.
Development, application, and philosophical background of theory in discipline of geography and geographical knowledge production. Similarities and differences in theories employed in physical and human geography and cartography. Geographic contributions to interdisciplinary theory bridging biophysical sciences, social sciences, and humanities.
Helps Ph.D. students develop their research question, design their research plan and complete a full dissertation research proposal.   
Designed for students preparing for higher degrees in geography.
Current topics in historical and ecological biogeography, including macroecology and areography, GIS and remote sensing, phylogeography, vegetation, plant and animal community and species geography.  Systematics, climate change, and conservation will be addressed.
Discussion of the physical science tradition in geography, including key concepts and current research in climatology, geomorphology, soils geography, biogeography, climate change, watershed science, and coastal studies. Research paradigms,  programs, and methods as used by physical geographers will be discussed.
Engineering, institutional, economic, and social basis for managing local and regional water resources. Examples in the context of California's water development and management. Uses of computer modeling to improve water management.
Recent developments in theoretical and experimental biogeography, historical biogeography and related themes in systematics, the biology of colonizing species, and related topics. 
Examination of philosophy and theory in human geography with an emphasis on contemporary debates and concepts in social, cultural, humanistic, political, and economic geographies. Specific discussion of space, place, scale and landscape; material and imagined geographies.
Introduction to seminal works in political theory, philosophy, and the social sciences that focus on citizenship and the public sphere; development of critical perspective regarding restructuring of public space in a pluralistic and global culture; discussion of contemporary case studies.
Economic theories and methods of planning for communities.  Human resources, community services and infrastructure, industrialization and technological change, and regional growth.  The community's role in the greater economy.
How global, political and economic restructuring and national and state policies are mediated by community politics; social production of urban form; role of the state in uneven development; dynamics of urban growth and decline; regional development in California.
Theoretical perspectives and empirical research on social, cultural, political, and economic processes of transnational migration to the U.S. Discussion of conventional theories will precede contemporary comparative perspectives on class, race, ethnicity, citizenship, and the ethnic economy.
Theories and comparative histories of modern welfare states and social policy in relation to legal/normative, organizational, and administrative aspects. Analysis of specific social issues within the U.S./California context.
Community development from the perspective of geographical political ecology.  Social and environmental outcomes of the dynamic relationship between communities and land-based resources, and between social groups. Cases of community conservation and development in developing and industrialized countries.
A topic or sub-discipline of geography forms the theme for the course in any given offering, with a focus on current research on this topic, field methodologies, and data analysis in human and physical geography.
Description of types of surveys commonly used in transportation demand modeling, including travel and activity diaries, attitudinal, panel, computer, and stated-response surveys. Discussion of sampling, experimental design, and survey design issues. Analysis methods, including factor, discriminant and cluster analysis.
In depth investigation of advanced topics in remote sensing applications, measurements, and theory.
Seminar focuses on specified topical areas within geography, which will vary quarter to quarter. Students expected to present an oral seminar on an aspect of the general topic under discussion.
Individually designed, supervised internship, off campus, in community or institutional setting.  Developed with advice of faculty mentor.
Seminars by UC Davis faculty and prominent national and international scholars; research presentations by Graduate Group in Geography Ph.D. candidates. 


Continuation of GER 001 in areas of grammar and basic language skills.
Completion of grammar sequence and continuing practice of all language skills through cultural texts.
Review of grammatical principles by means of written exercises; expanding of vocabulary through readings of modern texts.   
Review of grammatical principles by means of written exercises; expanding of vocabulary through readings of modern texts; addresses social relations and cultural practices in Germany; discusses history of Germany.
Review of grammatical principles by means of written exercises; expanding of vocabulary through readings of modern texts.
Readings, discussion and written projects treating topics such as communist-capitalist tension in German literary culture; masculine "versus" feminine authorial consciousness; disintegration and reconstitution of language reflecting cultural transformation; exorcising post-Holocaust national guilt and individual frustration-Germany's new European "mission."
Total immersion program in Germany or a German speaking setting in the U.S. to further develop students' proficiency in the German language.
Primarily for lower division students.
German literature from the Middle Ages to Classicism (800-1800) with an overview of major movements and authors.
German literature from the Age of Romanticism (1800) to the present  with an overview of major movements and authors. 
Practice in different kinds of writing, such as abstracts, correspondence, lecture summaries, analysis of or response to short literary texts.
Exercises in German-to-English, English-to-German translation using texts from the areas of culture and commerce.  
Introduction to the linguistic analysis of contemporary German, including its phonology, morphology, syntax and semantics, as well as sociolinguistic considerations.
Specialized language course using business-oriented information and publications as the basis for discussions, roleplay, reports, compositions and translations.
Specialized advanced language course providing in-depth study of major business topics with the help of authentic texts and videos.
Knowledge of German not required. Investigation of significant themes and issues within their European context.
Knowledge of German not required. Women in German film from the Weimar Republic to present, with special emphasis on conceptualizations of gender, historical and political context, aesthetic and filmic innovations.
Historical tradition of Jewish thought in the German cultural context; unique contributions of Jewish writers to culture of the German-speaking world; what it means to be "other" in the mainstream culture.
No knowledge of German required.  Interdisciplinary study of German society and culture during the Third Reich (1933-45);  readings in aesthetics, history, and philosophy; study of Fascist culture in literature, film, architecture, and the graphic arts; focus on everyday life in Hitler's Germany. 
Political, economic, social and cultural scene of Germany today. 
Major developments in German arts, philosophical thought, social institutions, and political history.
Literary-philosophical profile of the Mittelhochdeutsche Bltezeit in terms of the significant epics, romances, and lyric poetry. Readings in German.
Exemplary literary works of the 16th and 17th centuries tracing the principal lines of development and showing the reflection in literature of the social, as well as religious, scenes.
Critical assessment of principal works of Goethe and Schiller within the historical and philosophical context of their times.
Significant movements and schools in German literary history (e.g., the medieval troubadours, Storm and Stress, the romanticists, the George Circle, the expressionists), with emphasis on the broader cultural dynamics and ideologies as these apply to individual literary works.
Reading of short German fiction from the fin-de-sicle period and representative of various prose styles and cultural currents.
Selections from significant works of major contemporary writers, such as Hesse, Mann, Kafka, Rilke, Brecht, Grass.  
Examination of representative works by a major writer, set in the broader cultural context of the relevant period or movement.
Major writers in both Germanies, Austria, and Switzerland since 1945.  Topics include the concept of a feminist aesthetics, East vs. West German writers, and the status of minority women writers in Germany (Jewish, Turkish-German, Afro-German).
Study of the genre of lyric poety from the late Middle Ages through Renaissance, Baroque, Classical, Romantic, and Modern periods in correlation with other literary forms and the social climate of each period.
Inquiry into the art of the "Novelle" through analysis of the materials and formal devices of representative authors from Goethe to Kafka.
Readings in the works of Germany's leading dramatists from the 18th century to the present day, such as Lessing, Goethe, Schiller, Kleist, Bchner, Hauptmann, Brecht.
Topics in German intellectual history with materials from a number of periods, genres, and disciplines.   
Study of contemporary German-language news media (press, video, film, CD-ROM, Internet) for insight into political and cultural developments in the German-speaking countries.  
Analysis of the phenomenon of love in selected medieval lyrical poems and romances of the 12th- and 13th-century Bltezeit. Origins of courtly love, love & individualism, love & the Church, love & adultery.
Examples of German literature from the High Middle Ages to the present that explore the "encounter with the other" (people of color, different beliefs and cultures, and inner-German minorities).
"German Weimar (1919-1933) cinema.  Fritz Lang, F.W. Murnau, and G.W. Pabst among others.  Influence on world-wide (esp. Hollywood) film genres such as film noir, horror, science fiction, and melodrama." 
Notable literary repercussions of the zenith of Germany's international status at the time of Bismarck's Chancellorship. The poetry of Storm, the prose of Fontane, the drama of Hauptmann.
Total immersion program in Germany or a German speaking setting in the U.S. to further develop student proficiency in the German language.
Research of an integrative nature (in either "General" or "Area Studies Emphasis" fields of major), guided by thesis advisor chosen by student.
Writing of Honors Thesis on topic selected by student in consultation with thesis advisor.
Tutoring in undergraduate courses including leadership in small voluntary discussion groups affiliated with department courses.
Analysis of grammar and application of cognitive grammar to language instruction. Syntactical problems and analyses relevant to the language which the student will teach.
Emergence of aesthetic autonomy from 18th-century normative poetics during the Age of Goethe. The shift from a model based on the imitation of nature (and the Ancients) to a new concept grounded in the individuality of aesthetic experience.
Extensive reading of Middle High German texts in the original language. Examines linguistic and literary problems.
Theoretical instruction in modern teaching methods and demonstration of their practical application. Required of new teaching assistants.
Theoretical instruction in modern teaching methods and demonstration of their practical application. Required of new teaching assistants.
Theoretical instruction in modern teaching methods and demonstration of their practical application. Required of new teaching assistants.

Apprentice training in ongoing undergraduate literature courses taught by regular staff, with supplementary weekly critique sessions; intern leadership of discussion sections under staff supervision.
Fundamentals of genetic analysis and chromosome structure using model organisms including mutation, transmission, complementation, suppression, and enhancement as well as epigenetic phenomena at the whole organism and molecular levels.
Prokaryotic and eukaryotic genomes. Experimental strategies and analytical challenges of modern genomics research and the theory and mechanics of data analysis. Structural, functional, and comparative genomics. Related issues in bioinformatics.
Exploration of how basic mechanisms of molecular biology contribute to health and disease. Diseases related to animals, plants, and microbes will highlight fundamental concepts in the assembly, function and regulation of DNA, RNA, and protein.
Basic concepts of quantitative and population genetics including gene and genotypic frequencies, multiple factor hypothesis, phenotypic and genotypic values, heritability, selection, genetic variation, the detection of quantitative trait loci and evolution in populations. Experimental and analytical methods.
Students will conduct experiments in molecular genetics laboratories. Individual research problems will emphasize experimental design, experience with methodologies, and data interpretation.
Transfer of genes between unrelated organisms in nature. Dissemination of foreign DNA from genetically engineered organisms, including plants and animals. Mechanisms by which genes are transferred horizontally, and between kingdoms.
Human genomic organization; genetic structure of populations; positional cloning, application of linkage, association, and haplotypes; quantitative trait loci analyses; integrative genetic studies of gene expression; DNA repair mechanisms in genetic disease; mutation analyses; epigenetics; mitochondrial disease; gene manipulation and therapy.
Integration of modern biotechnology and classical plant breeding including the impact of structural, comparative and functional genomics on gene discovery, characterization and exploitation. Covers molecular markers, plant transformation, hybrid production, disease resistance, and novel output traits.
Functional genomics (how genetic variation and epigenomics affect gene expression), with an emphasis on clinical relevance and applications. Topics include genetic variation and human disease, cancer therapeutics, and biomarker discovery.
The development of modern genetic theories beginning with Mendel.
Emphasis on recent advances in the field of animal genetics, ranging from quantitative genetics to molecular biology as it relates to animals.
Topics of current interest in human genetics and genomics.
Topics of current interest related to the structure, modification and expression of genes.
Review of basic skills required of contemporary scientists. Topics include scientific conduct, manuscript preparation, grant writing, seminar presentations, and time management. Emphasis on responsibilities of scientists to factually and thoughtfully communicate results.
Current topics in plant genetics will be examined in student-conducted seminars and discussion format. The integration of molecular, organismal and population genetics to address questions in plant biology will be emphasized.
Group study of selected topics in genetics.
Practical experience in the methods and problems of teaching genetics. Includes analysis of texts and supporting material, discussion of teaching techniques, preparing for and conducting discussion or laboratory sections, formulating examinations under supervision of instructor.
Supervised work experience in general medicine.
Supervised opportunity to see entire spectrum of medical problems encountered by a general internist. Student spends time in General Medicine Clinic and on the General Medicine Consult Service. Consultation Service is particularly concerned with medical evaluation of surgical patients.
Guided independent study of issues in biomedical ethics, with discussionof readings that are based on student interests and needs. Participation in ethics rounds.
Introduction to concepts and methods of healthcare ethics. Emphasis on problems and methods.
Student will be involved in a clinical research problem within the
Continuation of GRK 001.
Supplementary study of New Testament Greek.
Continuation of GRK 002. Selected readings from Greek authors.
Supplementary study of New Testament Greek.

Review of Greek morphology, syntax, and vocabulary. Readings in Greek prose authors, including Xenophon.





Selected readings from the orators of 4th- and 5th- century Athens.
Selected readings from ancient Greek hexameter poetry. Wisdom poetry, hymns, epyllia, idylls, epic, natural history and other texts from the hexameter tradition.
Selected readings from Greek prose fiction of the late classical, Hellenistic and imperial periods.






Intensive grammar and vocabulary review through exercises in Greek prose composition. 
Translation and discussion of selected readings from Hellenistic to Byzantine Greek literature. 
Selected readings from ancient Greek philosophical and scientific writers. Texts on logical truth and empirical sense data, material and social contexts of ancient Greek philosophy and science.


Supervised internship, off campus and on campus, in community and institutional setting. Involves progressively greater (supervised) participation in program delivery or assessment.

Biological, social, and cultural influences in the psychological growth and development of children, prenatal through age six. Two observations of preschool children required.
Interplay of biological and social-cultural factors in the emotional, cognitive and social development from middle childhood through adolescence.
Development during early, middle, and late adulthood; biological, cognitive, and psycho-social aspects of adult development. Emphasis on normative patterns of development which characterize "successful aging."
Theories, methods, evidence, and debates in the field of cognitive development, such as nature/nurture, constraints on learning, and the role of plasticity. Topics include attention, memory, concepts about the physical and social world, and language.
Social and personality development of children, infancy through adolescence. Topics include the development of personality, achievement motivation, self-understanding, sex-role identity, and antisocial behavior. Emphasis on the interface between biological and social factors.
Cross-cultural studies of children in developing countries and among minority groups in the U.S.
Factors currently influencing American families including changing economic conditions, changing sex roles, divorce, and parenthood; theories and research on family interaction.
Nature, origin, determinants, and limits of longevity with particular reference to humans; emphasis on implications of findings from non-human model systems including natural history, ecology and evolution of life span; description of basic demographic techniques including life table methods.
Scientific process, research designs, and experimental controls; APA manuscript style and scientific writing; statistical analysis and interpretation of results. Laboratory exercises to collect data, analyze and interpret results, and write scientific papers. 
Current issues and methodology related to the process of psychological assessment with children.
Foundational principles and current issues in developmental psychopathology, the study of mental health problems and disorders that originate in childhood and adolescence (e.g., disruptive behavior, mood and anxiety disorders).
Individual differences in cognition, including learning disabilities and giftedness. Education implications and neurodevelopmental substrates of individual differences in cognition.
Integration of research, theory and practice in child development, emphasizing the role of relationships in creating a growth-promoting environment for young children. Includes: peer relationships, emotional understanding and self regulation, attachment, communication and school readiness. 
Application of theories of learning and development to interaction with infants, toddlers, and preschoolers at Early Childhood Laboratory. Applied skills in communication, guidance and curriculum.
Study of children's affective, cognitive and social development within the context of family/school environments, hospitals and foster group homes. 
Field study with children who are identified as emotionally distressed, including those with internalizing and externalizing behavioral problems. 
Apply theory and research on adult development and aging, work with older adults in a variety of settings, and develop skills relevant to that application. Develop a small research project.
How the social context affects adult development and aging. Emphasis on demography, social policy, culture, and adaptation. Oral histories as class projects.
Principles from cognition and aging and applies these to real-world concerns in areas including education, technology, job performance, and health. Considers physical and social changes in later life that impact functioning.                    
Principles from gerontology applied to older adults' use of technology to support health and well-being across a variety of domains (e.g., cognitive and physical fitness, social engagement) and contexts (assisted living, aging in place). Cognitive, sensory, and physical changes in later life that impact technology use.
Theories, methods, and findings concerning the relationship between cognitive processes and brain functioning. Readings, lectures, and in-class discussions cover research on normal younger and older adults, neuropsychological case studies, and selected patient groups (e.g., amnesia, schizophrenia, Alzheimer's disease).
Instructors lead discussions with undergraduate students who involve themselves in a research project. Research papers are reviewed and aspects of project proposals developed out of class are presented and evaluated.
Supervised internship off and on campus, in community, and institutionalsettings.
Theory and research on the biological, social, cognitive, and cultural aspects of development from conception to the age of five years.
Theory and research on biological, cognitive, social, and cultural influences on behavioral development from age five years until late adolescence.
Analysis of recent theories, research methods, and major findings on adolescent behavioral and emotional development, including contextual and genetic influences on adolescence, pubertal transitions, and social/family contexts and processes. Emphasis on multi-level mechanisms underlying adolescent behavioral and emotional development.
Introduction to human developmental neuroscience. Understanding of adolescence and its characterization as a time of risky and unhealthy behavior and vulnerability to onset of mental disorder as well as issues around plasticity of the adolescent brain and prevention/intervention.
Introduction to longitudinal data manipulation, organization, description, and modeling in the multilevel modeling and structural equation modeling frameworks.
Apply principles from cognitive aging to real-world concerns in areas such as education, technology, job performance, and health. Examine how physical and social changes occurring in later life impact functioning.
Principles from gerontology applied to older adults' use of technology to support health and well-being across a variety of domains (e.g., cognitive and physical fitness, social engagement) and contexts (assisted living, aging in place). Cognitive, sensory, and physical changes in later life that impact technology use.
Consideration of enduring issues in theories of behavioral development; analysis of adequacy of major theoretical schools (e.g., social learning, Piagetian) as scientific theories.
An overview of mechanisms of organismic development and the implications of developmental biology for the analysis of behavioral ontogeny; consideration of parallels between processes of organismic development and behavioral development in children and infra-human mammals.
Overview of qualitative and quantitative approaches to empirical inquiry in the social sciences, with a focus on theory and research methods in biological growth and cognitive and social/emotional development from prenatal period to death.
Manner in which cognitive processes are affected by aging as well as an understanding of the changes in the central nervous system occurring with aging.
Analysis of theories, research methods, and major findings of children's higher-order cognition, including origins of knowledge, development of problem-solving skills, reasoning strategies, and scientific concepts, with an emphasis on the underlying mechanism involved in children's thinking and learning processes.
Analysis of human development within the context of daily life. Contextualizing theories and methods of developmental psychology will be distinguished from contextual theories and methods. Developmental psychology models will be distinguished from child psychology models.
Theories, current issues, and empirical studies of atypical development from infancy to adulthood that integrate multiple system levels from genes, neurobiology, cognition, emotion, family and peer dynamics to community and cultural contexts.
Supervising instructors lead research discussions with their graduate students. Research papers are reviewed and project proposals are presented and evaluated. 
In-depth presentations of research issues in particular areas of behavioral development.
Individually designed supervised internship, off campus, in community or institutional setting. Developed with advice of faculty mentor.

Speaking, listening, comprehension, reading and writing fundamentals of modern Hebrew.
Speaking, listening comprehension, reading and writing fundamentals of modern Hebrew.
Continuation of HEB 010. Biblical text reading, simple/literal translation, verb and noun patterns, compounding of prepositions and nouns.
Continuation of HEB 011. Biblical text reading, simple/literal translation, verb and noun patterns, compounding of prepositions and nouns.
Development and refinement of grammar, composition, and language skills required for reading literary texts and conversing about contemporary topics at an advanced level. History of the Hebrew language.
Continued development and refinement of grammar, composition, and language skills required for reading literary texts and conversing about contemporary topics at an advanced level. History of the Hebrew language.
Continued development of grammar, composition, language skills required for reading literary texts and conversing about contemporary topics at an advanced level. History of the Hebrew language. Further development of writing and translating skills.
Directed group study. 
Special study. 
Third year Hebrew. Advanced grammar and composition. Focus on reading of literary texts, oral skills and accuracy in writing.
Third year Hebrew. Advanced grammar and composition. Focus on reading of literary texts, oral skills and accuracy in writing.
Third-year Hebrew. Advanced grammar and composition. Focus on reading of literary texts, oral skills and accuracy in writing. Students who have taken HEB 100C as second-year Hebrew may take HEB 100CN.
Continuation of HIN 001.  Devanagari Script through development of all language skills in a cultural context with emphasis on communicative proficiency.
Introduction to listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills in Hindi using the Devanagari script and brief introduction to basic literacy in Urdu using the Nasataliq script. 
Intermediate level course for students who have completed Elementary Hindi/Urdu or the equivalent. Students will continue to practice their skills in listening, speaking, reading and writing in Hindi and Urdu.
Intermediate level course where students will continue to practice their skills in listening, speaking, reading and writing in Hindi and Urdu.
Intermediate level course where students will continue to practice their skills in listening, speaking, reading and writing in Hindi and Urdu.
Directed group study. 
Special study. 
Teaching practicum. 
Supervised internship and study as a historian, archivist, curator, or an in another history-related capacity, in an approved organization or institution.
Primarily for lower division students. May be taught abroad.
Individual research resulting in a research paper on a specific topic in one of various fields of history. May be repeated for credit.
Directed reading and research aimed at preparing students to select appropriate topics and methodologies for a senior honors essay and to situate their topics within a meaningful, broad context of historical interpretations.
Research in preparation of a senior honors thesis under the direction of a faculty advisor.
Completion of a senior honors thesis under the direction of a faculty advisor.
Topics will emphasize the interaction of diverse regions of the world as well as common patterns of historical change.
West and Central Africa from 1500 to the present. Origins and impact of precolonial states and societies, the trans-Atlantic slave trade, colonialism, decolonization, nationalism, and changes in religions, politics, economics, gender, and culture.
Eastern Africa and the Indian Ocean world from 1500 to the present. Origins and impact of precolonial states and societies, slavery, trade, colonialism, decolonization, nationalism, and changes in religions, politics, economics, gender, and culture.
Southern Africa from 1500 to the present. Origins and impact of precolonial states and societies, European colonization, industrialization, urbanization, nationalism, apartheid, and changes in religions, politics, economics, gender, and culture.
Survey of social, political, cultural and economic change in African societies since the ending of European colonial rule in the 20th century. Themes include development, health and medicine, war and conflict, urbanization, global and inter-continental migration, and family and gender.
Themes of African history, such as African states and empires, slave trade, relationship of Egypt to rest of Africa, Bantu origins and migrations, and French policy of Assimilation and Association.
Viewing and discussion of films with short writing assignments.
Intensive discussion of topics and readings for HIS 174A.
Intensive discussion of topics and readings for HIS 174B.
Intensive discussion of topics and readings for HIS 174C.
Intensive discussion of topics and readings for HIS 174D. 
Patterns and problems of Chinese life traced through the Ming and Ching dynasties (c.15001800), prior to the confrontation with the West in the Opium War. Readings include primary sources and novels portraying elite ethos as well as popular culture.
Decline and fall of the Chinese Empire, with particular attention to the social and political crises of the 19th century, and the response of government officials, intellectuals, and ordinary people to the increasing pressures of Western imperialism.
Analysis of China's cultural and political transformation from Confucian empire into Communist state. Emphasis on emergence and triumph of peasant revolutionary strategy (to 1949), with some attention to its implications for post-revolutionary culture and politics.
Comprehensive analysis of recent Chinese history, including land reform, the Cultural Revolution, the post-Mao era, and the consequences of the new economic policies of the 1980s.
Topics in the history of China from the beginning of the imperial period through the high Qing dynasty.  Topics may be framed chronologically (e.g.,the Ming Dynasty) or thematically (e.g., Trade in early Chinese history). 
Topics in the history of China since 1800.  Topics may be framed chronologically (e.g., The Republican Period (1911-1948)) or thematically (e.g., The Modern Evolution of Chinese Law).
Supervised internship and study as historian, archivist, curator, or in another history-related capacity, in an approved organization or institution.
State and society within the Middle East from 1750 to 1914 under pressure of the changing world economy and European imperialism. Themes: colonialism, Orientalism, intellectual renaissance, Islamic reform, state-formation, role of subaltern groups.
Modern Iran from the mid 19th century to the present. Themes include the legacy of imperialism, cultural renaissance, the World Wars, nationalism, modernization, Islamic revival, gender, revolutionary movements, politics of oil and war.
History of Modern Korea, from Yi dynasty period to 1990s. Covers the political and socioeconomic changes in 19th century, modernization under Japanese colonialism, postwar economic growth and effects of the Cold War.
Tutoring of students in lower division courses. Weekly meeting with instructors in charge of courses. Written reports on methods and materials required. No final examination.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.

Designed primarily for students preparing for higher degrees in history. Ancient. 
Designed primarily for students preparing for higher degrees in history. Medieval.
Designed primarily for students preparing for higher degrees in history. Renaissance & Reformation.
Designed primarily for students preparing for higher degrees in history. Early Modern Europe.
Designed primarily for students preparing for higher degrees in history.(E)Europe since 1815.
Designed primarily for students preparing for higher degrees in history. China to 1880.
Designed primarily for students preparing for higher degrees in history. China since 1880.
Designed primarily for students preparing for higher degrees in history. Britain.
Designed primarily for students preparing for higher degrees in history. Latin America since 1810.
Designed primarily for students preparing for higher degrees in history. American History to 1787.
Designed primarily for students preparing for higher degrees in history. United States, 1787-1896.
Designed primarily for students preparing for higher degrees in history. United States since 1896.
Designed primarily for students preparing for higher degrees in history. Modern Japan.
Designed primarily for students preparing for higher degrees in history. African Historiography.
Designed primarily for students preparing for higher degrees in history. Cross-Cultural Women's History.
Designed primarily for students preparing for higher degrees in history. History of Science and Medicine.
Designed primarily for students preparing for higher degrees in history. Jewish History.
Designed primarily for students preparing for higher degrees in history. Advanced Topics in World History.
Designed primarily for students preparing for higher degrees in history.(X)World History.
Fundamental issues and debates in the study of history. Ancient. Readings, papers, and class reports.
Fundamental issues and debates in the study of history. Medieval Europe. Readings, papers, and class reports.
Fundamental issues and debates in the study of history. Modern Europe. Readings, papers, and class reports.
Fundamental issues and debates in the study of history. India. Readings, papers, and class reports.
Fundamental issues and debates in the study of history. Africa. Readings, papers, and class reports.
Fundamental issues and debates in the study of history. China. Readings, papers, and class reports. 
Fundamental issues and debates in the study of history. Japan. Readings, papers, and class reports.
Fundamental issues and debates in the study of history. United States. Readings, papers, and class reports.
Fundamental issues and debates in the study of history. Latin America. Readings, papers, and class reports.
Designed for students preparing for higher degrees in history. Individual research and analysis resulting in substantial research paper of publishable quality. Completion required of all Ph.D. candidates. The three courses must be taken in continuous sequence, ordinarily during second year.
Designed for students preparing for higher degrees in History. Individual research and analysis resulting in substantial research paper of publishable quality. Completion required of all Ph.D. candidates. The three courses must be taken in continuous sequence, ordinarily during second year.
Topics in the history of medieval and early Renaissance Europe.
Primary sources and research methodologies in the history of modern France and Germany. May be repeated once for credit.

Research in literature, methods, and sources on aspects of United States history, culminating in each student completing a research paper in the field by the end of the second quarter. 
Research in literature, methods, and sources on aspects of United States history, culminating in each student completing a research paper in the field by the end of the second quarter. 
Research on topics to be chosen by the students for the purpose of writing article-length papers. 
Completion of article-length papers on topics chosen by students. 
Readings in Chinese historical materials. Training in the use of Chinese reference works (including on-line resources). 
Student prepares and teaches one lower division history course in a nearby community college under the supervision of a UC Davis instructor and a community college instructor.
An introduction to the broad comparative and theoretical issues of teaching methods and techniques in history.
Thematic study of human rights. Topics may include contemporary or historical issues in the promotion, protection, and violation of human rights; human rights and the arts, religion, literature are possible topical areas. 
Comparative and critical study of the modern phenomenon of genocide from religious, ethical and historical perspectives. 
Group study on focused topics in human rights. May be taught abroad.
Opportunity for advanced undergraduate students to work with a faculty member in a focused manner on a topic or topics of human rights.
Introduces the advanced study of Human Rights and the theoretical and practical elaboration of the international Human Rights system. Seminar engages with criticism of Human Rights and develops research and teaching within disciplinary and interdisciplinary frameworks.
Explores the multiple convergences among memory, culture, and human rights. Discusses diverse approaches to how societal actors in different historical, cultural, and national settings, construct meanings of past political violence, inter-group conflicts, and human rights struggles.
Group study on focused topics in human rights. Four-unit courses may serve as electives for the Designated Emphasis in Human Rights.
Individual study for the designated emphasis in human rights.
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum. 
Examination of special topics in selected lower division courses through additional readings, discussions, term papers, collaborative work, or special activities, including projects, field and laboratory experiences, computer simulations, creative works.
Supervised work experience under the auspices of the Davis Honors Challenge.


In-depth examination of material in an upper division course as defined in an Honors Contract Proposal submitted by the student. Contract must be approved by the instructor and the Honors Council of the Academic Senate.
Supervised work experience under the auspices of the Davis Honors Challenge.
Team-based work on actual problems drawn from the public or private sector. Focus on critical thinking and analytic interpretation, oral and written communication skills, and developement of practical solutions to real-world problems.
Guided independent study of a selected topic leading to the presentation of an honors thesis/honors project.


Experience in laboratory research.
Basic concepts of the physiology of the hematopoietic organ, the pathophysiology of hematopoietic disease, and concepts of therapeuticswill be offered for study. The specific topics to be dictated by the interest and background of the students.
Laboratory investigation contributing to the dissertation for a graduatedegree.
Covers the principles of oncology and the pathophysiology of specific, common cancers correlated with organ systems pathophysiology and systemic pathology courses.
Acting intern on inpatient hematology/oncology ward service.
Student is an integral member of the inpatient hematology and oncology consult service, the bone marrow service, and will attend all conferences sponsored by the Division.
Outpatient rotations in related clinics. Participation with members of the subspecialty service in the initial clinical evaluation, work-up, management and follow-up of the patient with hematologic or oncologic disorders. 
Covers cancer as a process, beginning with risks and prevention, preneoplasia, microinvasion, treatment options, metastases and systemic therapy, pain medicine and palliative care, and cancer communication. Format includes traditional lectures, student-led case discussions, and problem-based learning.  

Student facilitated course intended primarily for lower division students.

In-depth scientific analysis of cannabis and cannabinoids, topics include biochemical, physiological, behavioral, pharmacological, social and therapeutic aspects of cannabinoids, with emphasis on the physiological impacts on major organ systems in humans and animals, and the potential medicinal uses.
Centers on fundamental mechanisms and pathophysiological basis for animal and human diseases. Case-based and uses animal and human diseases to help exemplify the physiological consequences of organ dysfunction.
Supervised work experience in physiology and related fields.
Directed reading, discussion and/or laboratory experience on selected topics.
Student facilitated course intended primarily for upper division students.

Under the supervision of a faculty member, an undergraduate student plans and develops the course they will teach under 098F/198F.
Under the supervision of a faculty member, an undergraduate student teaches a course under 098F/198F.
Advanced course on fundamental principles of cell physiology, transport physiology, signal transduction, physiology of excitable cells, and muscle physiology.
For graduate students desiring to explore particular topics in depth.Lectures and conferences may be involved.

Anatomy of the normal human nervous system, to include gross external and internal morphology of brain and spinal cord, and function neuroanatomy of motor, sensory and cognitive systems. Incorporates application of neuroanatomy to clinical problem solving.
Provides an in-depth scientific analysis of current knowledge on cannabis and cannabinoids pertaining to human physiology and potential medicinal uses.
Special Study Module, a four-week course on the topic: Care of the Critically Ill Surgical Patient: Use of Physiological Principles to Guide Treatment of Patients with Common Surgical Problems.
Assist instructor by tutoring medical students in preparation for one of the departmental courses that is a component of the required curriculum of the School of Medicine.
Directed reading and discussion on selected topics in human physiology.
Laboratory investigation on selected topics.
Core course to introduce students to the principles that are of general importance in horticultural and agronomic research, including agroecology, plant developmental physiology, crop improvement, and biotechnology. Generally taken in the first year of the graduate program. 
Introduction to horticultural and agronomic cropping systems.  Covers current applied research within agroecology, crop improvement, crop production, postharvest biology.  
Following lectures/discussions of scientific methodology, students develop research proposals aided by classroom discussions and individual interactions with instructors. Lectures and critiques of classical papers provide a sense of the evolution of the current concepts in perennial plant biology.
Development and application of models.  Emphasis on physiological and ecological models, with examples from areas of interest to class participants.  Applications to horticultural systems.
Seminars presented by invited speakers, students, or faculty on selected topics in horticulture.
Research.
Small group discussions and preparation of short papers for course 1.
Small group discussions and preparation of short papers for HUM 001.
Evolution of the "medical arts" into the "science of medicine." Culture of medicine in the context of society, medical ethics.
Small group discussions and preparation of short papers for HUM 004.
History of travel from the age of exploration to the modern era. Contemporary trends in travel, including mas tourism, adventure travel, and ecotravel.  Social, economic, and cultural issues related to modern trends in travel. Analysis of literary representations of travel.
Interdisciplinary approach to the use of story across time, culture, and discipline. How the telling and retelling of particular stories reflect the values, concerns, and assumptions of their original audiences and genres.
Small group discussions and preparation of short papers for HUM 009.
Interdisciplinary approach to contemporary issues (abortion, AIDS, civil rights, war and peace, welfare state) around which individuals, communities and institutions define themselves in American society, by applying principles of narrative theory to the narratives where those issues are embedded.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.

Topics in the humanities, selected by the instructor.
Individually designed supervised internship, off campus, in community or institutional setting.  Developed with advice of faculty mentor.

Work experience off and on campus in Hydrologic Science. Internship supervised by a member of the faculty.

Fluid mechanics axioms, fluid statics, kinematics, velocity fields for one-dimensional incompressible flow and boundary layers, turbulent flow time averaging, potential flow, dimensional analysis, and macroscopic balances to solve a range of practical problems.
General course for agricultural and engineering students dealing with soil and plant aspects of irrigation and drainage. Soil-water principles including water movement, plant responses to irrigation regimes, water use by crops; also irrigation systems and water quality.
Estimation of evapotranspiration (ET) for irrigation management and water resources planning; including the basic principles and key factors controlling evaporation and ET rates, methods of measuring these factors in the field and remotely, and determination of likely water requirements for crops and various landscape conditions as needed for water resources planning.  
Principles of plant interactions with soil and atmospheric water environments and practical applications to crop management (e.g., irrigation) and plant eco-physiology (e.g., drought). 
Chemistry of natural waters; dielectric properties of water; thermodynamic and mass-action relations; metal hydrolysis; acid-base equilibria; metal-coordination chemistry; solubility calculations; electron-exchange reactions; sorptive partitioning; ion exchange; and dissolved organic matter.
Introduction to the processes that constitute the hydrologic cycle. Special emphasis on a quantitative description of the following processes: precipitation, infiltration, evaporation, transpiration, surface runoff, and groundwater runoff.
General course considering hydrologic processes from a systems or statistical model perspective. General probability concepts are applied to frequency, time series and spatial data analysis. Linear systems are also considered in conjunction with Kalman filter techniques.
Movement and storage of water in individual ecosystems and the integrated functioning of water and biota at the watershed scale.
Fundamentals of groundwater flow and contaminant hydrology. Occurrence, distribution, and movement of groundwater. Well-flow systems. Aquifer tests. Well construction operation and maintenance. Groundwater exploration and quality assessment. Agricultural threats to groundwater quality: fertilizers, pesticides, salts. 
Introduction to watershed engineering, storm water management, design of hydraulic systems. Topics include hydrological risk analysis, flood routing, design storms, open channel flow, pipes, culverts, spillways, and detention basins. Class project and field trips will apply theory to real-life problems.
Physical and chemical processes affecting groundwater flow and contaminant transport, with emphasis on realistic hydrogeologic systems. Groundwater geology and chemistry. Fundamentals of groundwater flow and transport analysis. Laboratory includes field pumping test and work with physical and computer models.
Practical hydrology and runoff water quality management from disturbed watersheds. Development of hillslope and soils restoration concepts and practice, modeling and application.
Principles and issues of California Water Law.Types of water rights, groundwater rights and management, and protection of instream uses.Water projects, role of federal government and federal/state relations. Basic water quality acts, endangered species act, water transfers and current water issues.
Measurement methods and data analysis for evaluation of water storage, movement and contamination in the field.  Equipment such as data loggers, water and sediment samplers, pressure transducers, weather stations, surveying equipment, and flow meters will be used.
Ecosystem and landscape modeling with emphasis on hydrology and solute transport. Spatial analysis of environmental risk analysis including ecological risk assessment, natural resource management. Spatial database structures, scripting, data models, and error analysis in GIS.
Work experience off and on campus in water science. Internship supervised by a member of the faculty.

Continuum mechanics of static and dynamic air, water, earth and biological systems using hydraulic, heat and electrical conductivity; diffusivity; dispersion; strain; stress; deformation gradient; velocity gradient; stretch and spin tensors.
Continuum mechanics of static and dynamic air, water, earth and biological systems using hydraulic, heat and electrical conductivity; diffusivity; dispersion; strain; stress; deformation gradient; velocity gradient; stretch and spin tensors.
Principles and modeling of water flow and chemical transport in the vadose zone, with specific applications to soils. Topics include hydraulic properties, finite difference application to unsaturated water flow, parameter optimization, diffusive and convective transport in gaseous and liquid phases.
Applications of deterministic and stochastic mathematical programming techniques to water resource planning, analysis, design and management. Water allocation, capacity expansion, and reservoir operation. Conjunctive use of surface water and groundwater. Water quality management. Irrigation planning and operation models.
Exploration of theoretical and empirical foundations of sediment production on hillslopes using computer models and field experiments to promote an understanding of how watersheds evolve naturally and with human impacts.
Survey of the processes and landforms associated with sediment deposition in the coastal zone. Application of geomorphic principles to coastal management issues.
Techniques used to model the spatio-temporal structure of rainfall and runoff are introduced. Procedures studied include those based on stochastic point processes, chaos theory, fractal geometry, and fractional noises.
Finite difference and finite element techniques in modeling groundwater flow and transport. Fundamentals of constructing and calibrating models with hands-on applications. Methods and limitations of numerical solution of transport equations. Model interpretation and ethics.
Statistical treatment of spatial data with hydrologic emphasis. Topics: theory of random functions, variogram analysis, Kriging/co-Kriging, indicator geostatistics, and stochastic simulation of spatial variability. Geostatistical software use.
Selecting and building groundwater flow and transport models. Planning, preparation, execution, presentation, and review of modeling projects. Review of methods, assumptions, and limitations of groundwater models; practicing with MODFLOW, MT3D, associated GUI, and with other groundwater modeling software of choice.
Characterization of homogeneous random fields; extremes and spectral parameters; geometry of excursions, local averaging; scale of fluctuation; non-Gaussian and irregular random fields; geostatisticalapplications.
In depth investigation of advanced topics in remote sensing applications, measurements, and theory.
Seminars and critical review of problems, issues, and research in hydrologic sciences. Oral presentations of research. Topics vary.


Forty-hour course designed to meet the requirements of Federal OSHA
Supervised internship, off and on campus, in community and institutional settings.
How social and cultural factors influence technological change in agriculture; theories of diffusion of innovations; social impact analysis and technology assessment.
Traditional and evolving use of trees in agricultural ecosystems; their multiple roles in environmental stabilization and production of food, fuel, and fiber; and socioeconomic barriers to the adoption and implementation of agroforestry practices.
Principles of leadership and management for international agricultural development. Organizations and organizational behavior, and the implications for planning and administering organizations involved in the global development effort.
Supervised internship, off and on campus, in community and institutional settings.
Directed group study.
Special study for advanced undergraduates.
Economic perspective on small farm development. Establishes a basis for predicting farmers' responses to changes in the economic environment, and for proposing government policies to increase small farm production and improve farmer and national welfare.
Unifying concepts of cropping systems in temperate and tropical climatic zones; agroecosystems stability, diversity and sustainability; management strategies, resource use efficiency and their interactions; role of animals, their impact on energy use efficiency, nutrient cycling, and providing food and power..
Interdisciplinary setting for application of student skills and specialization to a "real world" development project. Focus on team-building and effective interdisciplinary problem-solving methods, with the objective of producing a project document and presentation within a specified deadline. 
Discussion and critical evaluation of advanced topics and issues in international agricultural development.
Selected topics dealing with current issues in agricultural development in lesser developed nations. Variable content.
Individually designed supervised internship, off or on campus, in community, business or institutional setting. Developed with advice of faculty mentor and Humphrey Coordinator.
Directed group study.
Research.
Teaching assistant training practicum.
Investigation of the Common Law System of the United States. Includes structure of the U.S. government, Constitutional law, contracts, torts, real property, consumer law, securities law, intellectual property, antitrust, taxation, labor law, environmental law, ethics, remedies, legal research and trial practice.
Investigation of the Common Law System of the U.S. Includes the American constitutional system, the American judiciary, the American civil trial, and foundational substantive and procedural law such as real property, torts, criminal law and procedure, civil procedure, and contracts.
Orientation to advanced topics in U.S. law: Intellectual Property (including copyright and trademarks), Commercial and Consumer Law, Advanced Contracts, Antitrust, Taxation, Remedies, Labor Law, Environmental Law, Dispute Resolution, Remedies and introduction to trial techniques and legal research/writing.
Examines sorts of promises that are enforced and the nature of protection given promissory obligations in both commercial and noncommercial transactions. Inquiry is made into the means by which traditional doctrine adjusts to changing social demands. 
Examines formation of the sorts of promises that are enforced and the nature of protection given promissory obligations in both commercial and noncommercial transactions. Inquiry is made into the means by which traditional doctrine adjusts to changing social demands. 
Examines formation of the sorts of promises that are enforced and the nature of protection given promissory obligations in both commercial and noncommercial transactions. Inquiry is made into the means by which traditional doctrine adjusts to changing social demands.
Examines issues of performing promises that are enforceable and possible breach of promissory obligations in both commercial and noncommercial transactions. Inquiry is made into the means by which traditional doctrine adjusts to changing social demands. 
Examines issues of performing promises that are enforceable and possible breach of promissory obligations in both commercial and noncommercial transactions. Inquiry is made into the means by which traditional doctrine adjusts to changing social demands.
Study of the fundamental and recurrent problems in civil actions including the methods used by federal and state courts to resolve civil disputes.
International and U.S. business and legal transactions. Legal planning, problem solving, decision making and negotiations related to the break-up and dissolution of a major international joint venture. U.S. laws including finance, tax, bankruptcy, labor, antitrust, environmental, corporate structures and intellectual property. Offered every three years.
Principles, doctrines and controversies regarding the structure and division of powers in American government. Includes judicial review, jurisdiction, standing to sue, federalism, federal and state powers and immunities, and the separation of powers among branches of the federal government.
Principles, doctrines and controversies regarding the structure and division of powers in American government. Includes judicial review, jurisdiction, standing to sue, federalism, federal and state powers and immunities, and the separation of powers among branches of the federal government.
Principles, doctrines and controversies regarding the structure and division of powers in American government. Includes judicial review, jurisdiction, standing to sue, federalism, federal and state powers and immunities, and the separation of powers among branches of the federal government.
Principles, doctrines and controversies regarding the U.S. Constitution Bill of Rights, including due process of law, equal protection, freedom of expression, freedom of religion, state action, and congressional legislation in aid of civil rights and liberties.
Mechanisms for resolving disputes including the alternatives to litigation such as negotiation, mediation, and arbitration. Advantages and disadvantages of each approach. Offered every three years.
Introduction to theoretical and empirical approaches to negotiation for the purposes of making deals and resolving legal disputes. 
Introduction to theoretical and empirical approaches to negotiation for the purposes of making deals and resolving legal disputes. 
Principles and empirical approaches to advanced negotiations including negotiation framework, models, styles, multiple party/issue negotiations and settlements. 
Principles and empirical approaches to advanced negotiations including negotiation framework, models, styles, multiple party/issue negotiations and settlements. 
Legal rules and concepts applicable to business associations including general partnerships, joint ventures, limited partnerships, limited liability entities, and sole proprietorships.
Legal rules and concepts applicable to business associations including general partnerships, joint ventures, limited partnerships, limited liability entities, and sole proprietorships.
Legal problems arising from international business transactions. Focus on international sales contracts, choice of law, forum selection clauses, letters of credit, transfers of technology, regulation of bribery, development of joint ventures, repatriation of profits, foreign exchange problems, and national efforts to control imports.
Introduces students to a wide variety of alternative dispute resolution procedures, with an in-depth emphasis on negotiation, mediation and arbitration. 
The completion of a written research project under the active supervision of a faculty member in satisfaction of the research-writing requirement.
An analysis of the United States taxation of multinational investments including jurisdiction of tax, the U.S. tax system, foreign tax credits, treaties, and transfer pricing.
Federal constitutional limits on government authority to gather evidence and investigate crime. Includes Fourth Amendment limits on search, seizure, and arrest; Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination; Sixth Amendment right to counsel.
Practical approach to mergers and acquisitions with an in-depth look at the planning, negotiation and completion of mergers and acquisitions.
Practical approach to mergers and acquisitions with an in-depth look at the planning, negotiation and completion of mergers and acquisitions.
Structural and jurisdictional issues associated with securities practice. Topics include the regulation of public offerings, transactions by corporate insiders, regulation of corporate disclosure and conduct, and the liabilities of corporations and individuals under anti-fraud provisions.
Introduction to the mediation process. Development of communication skills, the ability to analyze disputes, to understand why mediations succeed or fail, and understand the advantages and limitations of mediation as a method of resolving disputes. 
Operating law across national borders; emphasis on methods of resolving international disputes. International aspects of jurisdiction, choice of law, judgment enforcement, forum choice, process service, taking of evidence, foreign sovereign immunity, extraterritorial regulation of antitrust, securities; other national laws.
Operating law across national borders; emphasis on methods of resolving international disputes. International aspects of jurisdiction, choice of law, judgment enforcement, forum choice, process service, taking of evidence, foreign sovereign immunity, extraterritorial regulation of antitrust, securities; other national laws.
Institutional features of international banking transactions, the structure of a large financial deal, and the mechanics of overseeing large loans. Emphasis on negotiable instruments such as bills of lading, letters of credit, standby letters of credit, and interbank transactions. Offered every three years.
A comparative study of the development of schools of legal thought, chiefly Common law systems and Civil law traditions. Attention to the historical reasons for their divergence, contemporary aproaches to universal problems such as succession, torts, and contracts, the cross-fertilization of laws and difficulties commonly associated with importing foreign law into new territory.
An investigation of global trading systems including international trade in goods and services, e-commerce, international intellectual property, international tax planning and investment. Includes substantive and procedural provisions of the World Trade Organization (WTO) and the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). Offered every three years.
Prevention and resolution of disputes in international commerce. Emphasis on preparing for a trial in the United States. Includes the study of pre-trial motions, jury selection, opening statements, rules of evidence, closing arguments, and the selection of appropriate strategies. Offered every three years.
Historical and institutional background of Antitrust law in the United States. The statutory framework including price fixing, limits on distribution, monopolization and mergers, and reporting requirements.
How capital is raised in international markets. Investment strategies for U.S. markets. Taxation of financial investments, international currency regulation, and assessing rates of return on international investments. Offered every three years.
Intensive study of intellectual property law. Including copyright, trademark and patent law and unfair competition.
Intensive study of intellectual property law. Including copyright, trademark and patent law and unfair competition.
Covers a range of remedies for contract breach: remedies under common law and equity, liquidated damages clauses, remedies for mistake and unconscionability as well as breach of contract for the Sale of Goods under UCC Article II.
Covers a range of remedies for contract breach: remedies under common law and equity, liquidated damages clauses, remedies for mistake and unconscionability as well as breach of contract for the Sale of Goods under UCC Article II. 
Introduction to federal and state environmental law. Historical development of environmental law; the role of courts, the legislature and the executive branch in the development and implementation of environmental policy. Review of major statutes.
Intellectual property as it relates to current forms of legal protection and how new innovations fit into these models, including public-private technology transfer, patents, institutional objectives, technology transfer offices, startups, and licenses.
American legal system and its structure. Legal research methodologies and presentation with attention to analysis, synthesis, organization, and editing techniques common to legal writing.
Advanced seminar on a current topic in International Commercial Law. Offered at the University of Cologne in Cologne, Germany for two weeks each summer. 
Advanced seminar in a current topic in International Commercial Law. Topic changes each year course is offered.
Advanced seminar in a current topic in International Commercial Law.  Topic changes each year course is offered.
Student individualized research projects under faculty supervision.
Integrates information on biological and molecular nature of the causative organism, modern diagnostics, treatment and prevention strategies, and the role of infectious diseases in contemporary society and throughout human history.
Discrete problem requiring reading and actual manual effort in solution will be assigned to each student. Progress and results will be reviewed at intervals with instructor and via seminar presentation.
Infectious disease epidemiology and prevention, with equal emphasis on human and veterinary diseases. Major categories of infectious diseases by mode of transmission.
Laboratory investigation contributing to the dissertation for a graduatedegree.
Familiarizes students with the diagnosis and treatment of individuals infected with the human immunodeficiency virus. Interview patients, observe patient care and participate in ongoing clinic research as well as examine alternative lifestyles.
Lecture and guided clinical practice in a supervised clinical setting, focusing on the social and medical aspects of health care for injection drug users.
Patients ill with infectious diseases, including AIDS, will be evaluated and presented at rounds and case conferences. Patients are also seen in the Infectious Diseases Clinic. Instruction in clinical microbiology and the proper use of the laboratory will be provided.
Discrete problem requiring reading and actual manual effort in solution will be assigned to each student. Progress and results to be reviewed at
Supervised internship in internal medicine and related fields.
Directed group study in medicine and related fields.

Supervised work experience in internal medicine and related fields.
The undergraduate student, through active participation in the medical aspects of community health clinics, gains knowledge of the organization, administration, and problem-solving capabilities of these primary care facilities.
Directed group study in medicine and related fields.

Principles of etiology, mechanisms, diagnosis and management of the major diseases of the cardiovascular system.  Included are ischemic, valvular, hypertensive, cardiomyopathic, pericardial, and electrical disorders.
Using field trips, media, readings, and clinical experiences, eight-ten first-year medical students explore issues of race, health disparities and related issues in a four-week institute during the summer break.
Malignant disorders of blood cells and transfusion therapy. Covers acute leukemia, myelodysplasia, myeloproliferative disorders, lymphoma, and myeloma. 
Basic pathophysiologic principles of digestive diseases on which clinical concepts and judgments can be developed. Emphasis on pathophysiologic basis of gastroenterological and hepatic disorders with discussion of major disorders and their diagnosis and management.
Clinical aspects of respiratory anatomy, physiology, and pathology. Diagnostic procedures and a description of the major pulmonary diseases & disorders, and critical care medicine.
Principles of etiology, mechanisms, diagnosis and management of the major diseases of the cardiovascular system. Included are ischemic, valvular, hypertensive, cardiomyopathic, pericardial, and electrical disorders.
Fundamental aspects of disorders of body water, electrolytes and acid/base balance; major categories and mechanisms of parenchymal renal diseases; urinary tract infections.
Clerkship is divided into two, four-week blocks, one each at UCDMC and at Kaiser Hospitals.  Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty.  On-going patient write-ups, rounds, conferences are required.
Longitudinal Clerkship runs concurrently with Family Medicine, Pediatrics and Psychiatry for 32 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. On-going patient write-ups, rounds, conferences are required.
Longitudinal Clerkship runs concurrently with Family Medicine, Pediatrics and Psychiatry for 32 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. On-going patient write-ups, rounds, conferences are required.
Longitudinal Clerkship runs concurrently with Family Medicine, Pediatrics and Psychiatry for 32 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. On-going patient write-ups, rounds, conferences are required.
Longitudinal Clerkship runs concurrently with Family Medicine, Pediatrics and Psychiatry for 32 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. On-going patient write-ups, rounds, conferences are required.
Internal Medicine Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
Internal Medicine Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
Internal Medicine Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
Internal Medicine Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
Internal Medicine Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
Longitudinal Clerkship runs concurrently with Primary Care and Psychiatry for 24 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. On-going patient write-ups, rounds, conferences are required.
Longitudinal Clerkship runs concurrently with Primary Care and Psychiatry for 24 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. On-going patient write-ups, rounds, conferences are required.
Longitudinal Clerkship runs concurrently with Primary Care and Psychiatry for 24 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. On-going patient write-ups, rounds, conferences are required.
Individual directed studies in extended preparation for modified curriculum or to complete a clinical rotation following a leave of absence.
Individual directed studies in extended preparation for remediation of all or part of clinical rotation. Clinical studies to accommodate and satisfy remedial work as directed by the Committee on Student Progress and approved by the course IOR.
Legal and bioethical principles and concepts in medicine. Topics include standard of care, informed consent, reproductive medicine, and end-of-life issues.
Legal and bioethical principles and concepts in medicine. Topics include standard of care, informed consent, reproductive medicine, and end-of-life issues.
Comprehensive review of current treatment practices of cancer and state-of-the-art research impacting treatment and prevention of cancer. Emphasis on epidemiology, molecular biology, and pharmacology.
Covers Correctional Health delivery and the effects of detention and incarceration on health status. Special emphasis on problems unique to health care delivery in a prison setting. Student will spend time in clinical settings at three prison facilities.
Acting Internship in Internal Medicine for qualified 4th year Medical Students from the UC Davis School of Medicine at the Sacramento VA Hospital. Experiences will somewhat mirror those of AIs at UCDMC.
Assume role of acting intern and be primary physician on medical ward under direction of medical resident and staff. Teams I-V take call every fifth night. Emphasis on evidence-based inpatient care.
At UCDMC, student functions as acting intern on MICU service under direction of medical resident and staff. Responsibility for patients admitted to MICU. On call in hospital every fourth night.
Travel to foreign country for four weeks to collaborate with faculty from local universities and work in urban and rural environments, including hands-on experience with clinic patients. Cultural exchange and awareness of global health care. 
Hands-on primary care clinical experience in the ambulatory setting supervised by a general internist. Emphasis on evidence-based outpatient care.
Primary objective is to prepare future physicians to effectively integrate evidence-based medicine into their clinical practice. While this course has an Internal Medicine emphasis, the skills the course aims to impartformulating focused clinical questions, searching the medical literature, evaluating the quality of research, and integrating evidence into clinical practice, giving effective article presentations)apply to all future clinicians, regardless of their specialty.
Person-centered assessment modalities and diagnostic approaches with regards to Internal Medicine and its different subspecialties.  
Spend one week with the inpatient palliative care service, one week with the inpatient pain pharmacy service, and two weeks with Snowline Hospice.
Students are assigned to clinical settings that demonstrate ethnic,urban/rural, or other related aspects of clinical community health. Through active participation in health care delivery, students are able to relate conceptual with practical aspects of primary health care. 
Concept of "evil" and the role of collaborators, bystanders and participants exemplified by the holocaust and compared to problems physicians face in practice today. Demonstration that evil emerges incrementally until taken for granted.
Special study for medical students which may involve laboratory or library research, ambulatory or inpatient care responsibility on campus, at UCDMC or off campus by specific arrangement.
Comprehensive introduction to the principles of immunology.  
Covers current topics in the field of innate immunity through student seminar presentations and critical evaluation of the literature. Concepts include: pathogen recognition, intercellular communication, specialized cellular function and effector/signaling molecules.
Topics will include a broad range of frontiers in neuroimmunology and neuroinflammation. Research articles in current literature will serve to guide in-depth discussions of experimental approaches, technical aspects of experimental techniques, data interpretation, and other relevant aspects of each topic.
Introduction to critical reading of primary research papers in Immunology. Guided discussions on recent primary research papers provided to students before each class. 
Seminar presentations dealing with principles of xenobiotic effects on immune system functions and specific examples of drugs and environmental chemicals exerting toxic effects on the immune system.
Innate and acquired immunity as defense mechanisms against disease. Mechanisms regulating the distinct cell types driving these responses and current concepts in the literature.
Clinical immunology in animals and man. Pathogenesis of representative infectious diseases, hypersensitive reactions, and autoimmunity. Emphasis on specific and nonspecific immune effector mechanisms to combat infections or mediate pathology.
Cytokines and their involvement in human and animal physiology/disease, molecular mechanisms and receptor signaling. Immune and non-immune actions. Overlapping/redundant functions (referred to as the "cytokine network").
Presentation and discussion of faculty research topics in Immunology 
Basic concepts and current research topics in the field of mucosal immunology, with an emphasis on human immunology. Major emphases include innate and adaptive mucosal immunity, the gastrointestinal tract, the lung, lymphocyte trafficking, and mucosal vaccination. 


Analysis of worldwide migration patterns, and social scientific theories of international and transnational migration. Focus in economical, political, and social impact of immigration and potential for international and regional cooperation.
Selected topics in international relations. Variable content.
Work experience in international relations, with term paper summarizing the practical experience of the student.
Directed reading, research, and writing on topics selected by students and instructor culminating in preparation of a senior honors thesis under direction of a faculty advisor.
Directed reading, research, and writing on topics selected by students and instructor culminating in preparation of a senior honors thesis under direction of a faculty advisor.


Interrelation between the arts and sciences, focusing on a special topic. 
The nature of research at the undergraduate level.
Discussion of the integration of the arts and sciences, focusing on a special topic.  
A program of research culminating in the writing of a junior honors thesis under the direction of a faculty advisor.
A program of research culminating in the writing of a junior honors thesis under the direction of a faculty advisor.
Tutoring in Integrated Studies  courses, usually in small discussion groups. Weekly discussions with the instructor on the subject matter of the course being tutored and on the art and craft of teaching.
Continuation of ITA 001 or ITA 001S. Review of grammar and vocabulary, and practice of all language skills through cultural texts.
Continuation of  ITA 001 or ITA 001S. Review of grammar and vocabulary, and practice of all language skills through cultural texts. May be taught abroad.
Continuation of ITA 002 or ITA 002S. Review of grammar and vocabulary, and practice of all language skills through cultural texts.
Continuation of  ITA 002 or ITA 002S. Review of grammar and vocabulary, and practice of all language skills through cultural texts. May be taught abroad.
Review of grammar and syntax through written exercises and short prose works. Intended to develop the linguistic foundations of students who have completed the first year language classes.
Review of grammar and syntax through written exercises and readings of short prose works. Intended to develop the linguistic foundations of students who have completed the first year language classes. May be taught abroad.
Review and study of grammar and syntax, readings of short prose works, and written exercises. Intended to prepare students to read, understand, and discuss modern Italian.
Review and study of grammar and syntax, readings of short prose works, and written exercises. Intended to prepare students to read, understand, and discuss modern Italian. May be taught abroad.
Italian conversation with peers in classroom setting.
Italian conversation in local context outside United States. May be taught abroad.
Italian conversation with peers in a classroom setting.
Italian conversation in local context outside United States. May be taught abroad.
Reading and discussion of modern Italian prose, including selections from creative, scientific and journalistic writings.  Introduction to contemporary Italian literature and culture. Strengthening the student's command of the Italian language.
Reading and discussion of modern Italian prose, including selections from creative, scientific and journalistic writings. Introduction to contemporary Italian literature and culture as well as strengthening the student's command of the Italian language. May be taught abroad.
Intensive introductory course on Italian language with emphasis on structural similarities between Italian and Spanish.
Intensive Introductory course on Italian language with emphasis on structural similarities between Italian and Spanish.
Continuation of ITA 031. Intensive introductory course to Italian language and grammar with emphasis on oral and written communication. Highlights the structural similarities between Italian and Spanish.
Continuation of ITA 031. Intensive introductory course to Italian language and grammar with emphasis on oral and written communication. Highlights the structural similarities between Italian and Spanish.
Examination of a special topic in Italian language or culture (such asItalian culture seen through film, Italian feminism, literature, or politics) through shared readings, discussions, written assignments, or special activities such as film screening or laboratory work.
Primarily intended for lower division students.
Instruction and practice in expository writing in Italian, with emphasis on advanced grammar, organization, and vocabulary building. 
Instruction and practice in expository writing in Italian, with emphasis on advanced grammar, organization, and vocabulary building. May be taught abroad.
Practice in translation from Italian to English and English to Italian, using literary and nonliterary texts of different styles. Analysis of linguistic problems and elements of style contained in the translation material.
Practice in translation from Italian to English and English to Italian, using literary and non-literary texts of different styles. Analysis of linguistic problems and elements of style contained in the translation material. May be taught abroad.
Introduction to the study of the principal authors, works, and movements of the Medieval, Renaissance, and Early Modern periods in Italy.
Study of the origins of Italian religious and secular poetry of the 13th and 14th centuries. Diversified poetry is illustrated in works of St. Francis, Dante, Cavalcanti, Petrarch, the Sicilian School, the Sweet New Style Poets, and other authors.
Study of Dante Alighieri's Divina Commedia, and its role in the development of Italian language and literature. Emphasis will be placed on reading the whole poem within the historical context of the Middle Ages.
Study of the development of the short story in Italy, as exemplified in Giovanni Boccaccio's Decameron, in his predecessors and Renaissance followers.
Analysis of key texts from the high moment of the Italian Renaissance. The political and aesthetic legacy of humanism will be foregrounded in relation to authors such as Ficino, Ariosto, Machiavelli, Aretino, Castiglione, and Tasso.
Continued examination into the loss of an ideal. Emphasis on the conflicts in Michelangelo and Tasso leading to Marino, with an excursus on Galileos role in the formation of a modern literary standard.
Development of comic and tragic forms as critical representations of their societal and historical contexts, i.e. Machiavelli and the logic of power, Baroque dramatists in the service of counter-reformation Italy, Goldoni's comedies and bourgeois social consciousness.
Examination of the poetic tradition influenced by Petrarch. Consideration of the relation between gender and genre in such poets as Petrarch, Bembo, della Casa, Tasso, Marino, Gaspara Stampa, Veronica Franco, Isabella di Morra.
Development of modern Italian literature. Emphasis on the work of Goldoni, Bettinelli, Baretti, Parini, Alfieri, and Vico.
Romanticism in Italy, including Manzoni, Verga, and Verismo.
Development of the novel from Svevo to the present. Emphasis on the work of Svevo, Levi, Moravia, Pavese, and Vittorini.
Italian poetry with emphasis on Hermeticism; the theater of Luigi Pirandello and its role in the development of contemporary Italian drama.
Italian cinema of the 21st century in the context of profound cultural and social changes in Italy since World War II. Productions by representative directors such as Amelio, Giordana, Moretti, Muccino are included. Knowledge of Italian not required.
Italian cinema of the 21st century in the context of profound cultural and social changes in Italy since World War II. Productions by representative directors such as Amelio, Giordana, Moretti, Muccino are included. Knowledge of Italian not required. May be taught abroad.
In-depth study of a particular topic in Italian Culture. Topics include: Italian Cities; Church and State; the "Southern Question"; Fascism and Resistance; 1968: Counter Culture, Feminism and Terrorism; Multicultural Italy.
Development of representations of selfhood with particular attention to generic conditions, the confessional tradition and the problem of women's self-representation. Authors studied may included Petrarch, Tasso, Casanova, Alfieri, Zvevok, Sibilla Aleramo and Primo Levi.
Reading of Dante Alighieri's Divine Comedy, through the otherworld realms of Inferno, Purgatory, and Paradise.
Critical analysis of Renaissance texts with primary focus on issues such as human dignity, education and gender politics; "high" and "low" culture and its relation to literary practices.
Analysis of major works of Italian narrative fiction from unification of Italy to present. Students will learn to use representative methods and concepts which guide literary scholarship. Consideration of works within European social and cultural context.
Study of special topics and themes in Italian literature, such as comic literature, epic poetry, pre-20th-century theater, fascism, futurism, women and literature, and the image of America, etc.
Study of special topics and themes in Italian literature, such as comic literature, epic poetry, pre-20th-century theater, fascism, futurism, women and literature, the image of America, etc. May be taught abroad.
Introduction to Italian cinema through its genres. Focus on cinema as a reflection or a comment on modern Italian history. Film as an artistic medium and as a form of mass communication.
Examination of a special topic in Italian language or culture throughshared readings, discussions, written assignments or special activities such as film screening or laboratory work.
Participation in government and business activities to gain work experience and to develop a better knowledge of Italian language andculture.
Participation in community service, teaching, government, and business activities to gain work experience and to develop a better knowledge of Italian language and culture. May be taught abroad in Italy.
Guided research, under the direction of a faculty member, leading to a senior honors thesis on a topic in Italian literature, civilization, or language studies.
Writing of an honors thesis on a topic in Italian literature, civilization, or language studies under the direction of a faculty member.
Tutoring in undergraduate courses, including leadership in small voluntary discussion groups affiliated with departmental courses.
Field experience as Italian tutors or teacher's aides.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.
Group study on focused topics in Italian literature and culture. Varies according to instructor. May be taught abroad.

Opportunity for a faculty member to work with an advanced undergraduate student in a focused manner on a topic or topics of mutual research/creative interest. May be taught abroad.





Continuation of training in basic Japanese spoken and written skills.
Continuation of training in basic spoken and written skills in Japanese language. May be taught abroad.
Intermediate-level training in spoken and written Japanese in cultural context, based on language skills developed in JPN 003.
Intermediate-level training in spoken and written Japanese in cultural context, based on language skills developed in JPN 004.
Intermediate-level training in spoken and written Japanese in cultural context, based on language skills developed in JPN 005. May be taught abroad.
Special intensive course that combines the work of JPN 003, JPN 004, JPN 005, and JPN 006. Introduction to Japanese grammar and development of all language skills in a cultural context with emphasis on communication. Taught abroad in Japan.
Classification and communication of experience in Japanese culture; principles of language use in Japanese society. Speech levels and honorific language, language and gender, minority languages, literacy. Role of Japanese in artificial intelligence and computer science.
Classification and communication of experience in Japanese culture; principles of language use in Japanese society. Speech levels and honorific language, language and gender, minority languages, literacy. Role of Japanese in artificial intelligence and computer science.
Introduction and mastery of 300 basic Kanji or Chinese characters to establish a solid foundation in the novel and complex Kanji encountered while learning Japanese.
Introduction and mastery of 300 basic Kanji or Chinese characters to establish a solid foundation in the novel and complex Kanji encountered while learning Japanese.
Directed group study.

Readings in modern Japanese short stories, newspaper articles, and essays; conversation practice based on these readings.
Continuation of JPN 111.
Continuation of JPN 112. May be taught abroad.
Training in spoken Japanese for students with a basic working knowledge of the language. May be taught abroad.
Continuation of JPN 114A. Training in spoken Japanese for students with a basic working knowledge of the language. May be taught abroad.
Continuation of JPN 114B. Training in spoken Japanese for students with a basic working knowledge of the language. May be taught abroad.
Development of skills in the techniques of writing Japanese. Practice in short essay writing with an aim toward mastery of the vocabulary and syntax of written style Japanese.
Introduction to basic Japanese grammar and development of more advanced reading, writing, and conversation skills in a cultural context. Combination of JPN 006, JPN 111, JPN 112, JPN 113; intensively taught abroad in Japan.
First of three courses in a series of fourth year Advanced Japanese which focuses on the levels of formality or politeness in conversation as well as socio-cultural aspects and topics in the Japanese society.
Second of three courses in a series of fourth-year Advanced Japanese which focuses on the levels of formality or politeness in conversation as well as socio-cultural aspects and topics in the Japanese society.
Third of three courses in a series of fourth-year Advanced Japanese which focuses on the levels of formality or politeness in conversation as well as socio-cultural aspects and topics in the Japanese society. 
Short stories and essays by Japanese writers of the Meiji and Taish eras, from 1868 to 1926. Authors include Natsume Sseki, Izumi Kyka, Tanizaki Jun'ichir and Akutagawa Rynosuke. Readings and discussion in Japanese with some emphasis on translation into English.
Fourth-year level reading of representative works of modern Japanese literature including short stories, novellas, diaries, memoirs, poetry and excerpts from novels and plays from 1920 through the militaristic era, to the end of the war years in 1945.
Continuation of JPN 131, but may be taken independently. Covers selected texts from the immediate post-war years beginning in 1945 down to 1970 and the post-war recovery.
Continuation of JPN 132, but may be taken independently. Covers selected texts from 1970 to the present.
Fourth-year level reading of modern works by major specialists on traditional Japanese culture: history, religion, thought, art, international relations, and literary history and criticism. Focus is equally on developing reading skills and learning about Japanese culture.
Fourth-year level reading of authentic modern writings on Japanese culture, history, philosophy, society, religion, law, politics, international relations, aesthetics, and comparative culture by prominent critics, commentators, and scholars.
Fourth-year level reading of newspaper and magazine reports, articles, and editorials on domestic and international affairs relating to contemporary Japan.
Readings of short stories and essays by contemporary writers. Representative writers include Yoshimoto Banana, Otsuichi, Suzuki Koji, Kyogoku Natsuhiko, Ogawa Yoko, and Murakami Haruki. Readings and discussion in Japanese with some emphasis on translation into English.
Topical essays focused on contemporary Japan. Themes center on defining Japan today in terms of its future and past such as through its urban society, trends in architecture, "soft power" industries, and "traditional" elements as mainstays of Japan's cultural currency.
Basic features of classical Japanese grammar through careful reading of selected literary texts such as Hojoki or Tsurezuregusa.
Introduction to Japanese linguistics, featuring key aspects of the Japanese language. Analysis of Japanese from the perspectives of phonology, syntax, discourse analysis, sociolinguistics and psycholinguistics. 
Work experience in Japanese language, with analytical term paper on a topic approved by instructor.
Guided research, under the direction of a senate faculty member, leading to a senior thesis project on a topic in Japanese literature, culture, linguistics, or language studies.
Leading of small voluntary discussion groups affiliated with one of the Program's regular courses. 
Directed group study.

In-depth reading and critical analyses of major works by and critical literature on one or two prominent modern or contemporary writers such as Natsume Soseki, Mori Ogai, Shimazaki Toson, Akutagawa Ryunosuke, Tanizaki Junichiro, Abe Kobo and Oe Kenzaburo.
Directed independent study on a topic culminating in a term paper. Independent Studies may only be arranged with consent of the instructor and when graduate seminars are unavailable. 
 
Selected themes in Jewish thought in historical and social perspective. Traces the historical development of topics in Jewish thought such as Messianism, or focuses on one specific historical period, such as modern Jewish thought.
Literature written about the Jewish experience, treated in its historical and social context.  Examines literature written in one language, such as English, Hebrew, or Yiddish, or a theme, such as gender or modern identities, as expressed in different literary traditions.
Contemporary Hebrew literature, in translation, in relation to post-independence debates about religious, social, and political identity of the Jewish state; literary reflections of Israeli ethnic diversity and changing gender relations; modern Hebrew poetry and postmodern experiments in fiction.
Historical tradition of Jewish thought in the German cultural context; unique contributions of Jewish writers to culture of the German speaking world; what it means to be "other" in the mainstream culture.
Historical tradition of Jewish thought in the German cultural context; unique contributions of Jewish writers to culture of the German speaking world; what it means to be "other" in the mainstream culture.
Examination of American cinema to reveal how Jewish identity is expressed and submerged, tracing the relations between religion, identity, race, politics, and art.
Continuation of LAT 001.
Continuation of LAT 002. Selected readings from Latin authors.

Review of Latin morphology, grammar, and vocabulary. Readings in prose authors, including Julius Caesar.
Livy
Roman comedy.
Vergil: Aeneid.
Sallust.
Catullus.
Horace: Odes & Epodes.
Horace: Satires & Epistles.
Roman elegy.
Translation and discussion of selected readings from the works of Ovid.
Translation and discussion of selected readings from the works of Cicero.
Lucretius.
Vergil: Eclogues & Georgics.
Readings in Latin from one or more of the major Roman historians and biographers. Authors may include Sallust, Nepos, Livy, Tacitus, Suetonius, and Ammianus Marcellinus.
Translation and discussion of selected readings from Republican Latin literature.
Readings in Imperial Latin literature.
Intensive grammar and vocabulary review through exercises in Latin prose composition.
Latin style of selected early Christian writers. Topics may include: Latin translations of Greek and Hebrew scriptures, Christian Latin, with focus on North Africa, Palestine, or Spain; High literary Christian Latin; Christian Latin oratorical style.
Selected readings from the Vulgate and various medieval authors provide an introduction to the developments in the Latin Language and literature from the 4th to the 15th centuries.
Translation and discussion of selected readings from late imperial-early medieval Christian and pagan literature.
Readings in Latin that trace a theme across times, genres, and authors. 
Directed group study.
Special study for advanced undergraduates.
Designed to provide basic skills necessary to succeed in both law school and legal practice.
Study of doctrines and concepts of property law with primary emphasis on real property. Coverage includes: the estates in land system; the landlord-tenant relationship, conveyancing, and private and public land use control.
Includes lectures and in-class exercises working with print, and electronic, legal research materials to prepare responses to various fact patterns. Extensive use of real-world case scenarios to mimic conditions likely encountered by legal practitioners. Half of the course time is lecture; half is in-class practical assignments or discussion designed to enhance the students understanding of the concepts introduced.
Includes lectures and in-class exercises working with print, and electronic, legal research materials to prepare responses to various fact patterns. Extensive use of real-world case scenarios to mimic conditions likely encountered by legal practitioners working in the intellectual property legal practice.
Designed to provide foreign students with background skills at a more basic level than U.S. Legal Methods A and B. Audit carefully selected courses in the regular curriculum and complete assignments related to those courses.
Designed to provide foreign students with background skills at a more basic level than U.S. Legal Methods A and B. Audit carefully selected courses in the regular curriculum and complete assignments related to those courses.
Covers all essential aspects of patent law: patentable subject matter, novelty, utility, nonobviousness, enablement, prosecution, infringement, and remedies.
From biomedicine to cleantech, public institutions are playing leading roles in developing cutting-edge technologies. Explores the law and policy of publicly-supported innovation and technology transfer.
Analyze the legal, historical, and sociological aspects of the growing private sector provision of criminal justice services traditionally assumed by government, including prisons, policing, and adjudication.
Work on actual federal criminal cases in the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals and United States Supreme Court. File briefs amicus curiae on critical issues, and develop research, writing, and oral advocacy skills.
Work on actual federal criminal cases in the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals and United States Supreme Court. File briefs amicus curiae on critical issues, and develop research, writing, and oral advocacy skills.
The Criminal Justice System continues to evolve as perceptions regarding judges, police officers and criminal attorneys change. Analyzes how our sense of justice is formed and what it looks like in the actual practice of criminal law.
Understand the dynamics of interviewing and counseling process. Designed to be relevant to a broad spectrum of negotiation problems that are faced by legal professionals.
Structured around a simulated negotiation exercise with students from a similar class at Stanford Law School. Experience the development of a business transaction over an extended negotiation in a context that replicates actual legal practice. 
Examines the laws responses to a particular aspect of globalization, transnational crime. Explore the phenomenon of transnationality and how it affects the power of nation-states, acting alone or together, to prosecute certain crimes.  
Tax issues Related to estate planning.
Advanced issues in the governance of publicly held corporations. Separation of ownership and control and how the law has addressed this issue at the theoretical level and in the context of topics such as the duties of corporate directors, shareholder voting rights, and competition among states to attract corporate charters. 
Public interest lawyers often spend much time in the courtroom. Prosecution, defender, and legal aid offices usually don't have resources to train lawyers in trial work. Seeks to help remedy this deficiency by helping develop witness interrogation skills.  
Introduction to the various legal and business considerations involved in forming and operating an emerging growth business.
Introduction to the various legal and business considerations involved in forming and operating an emerging growth business.
Practical approach to mergers and acquisitions, with an in-depth look at the planning, negotiation, documentation and completion of mergers and acquisitions.  
In addition to examining the evidence law governing the admission of scientific testimony, considers trial advocacy in presenting and attacking such testimony.
Elective Course for Environmental Law Certificate Program. May satisfy Advanced Writing Requirement with professor's permission. Provides an overview of the structure and basic principles of international environmental law and policy. 
Regulation of the distribution of securities under the Securities Act of 1933 and SEC Rules adopted there under, registration and reporting provisions of the 1934 Securities Exchange Act.
Legal rules and concepts applicable to business associations, both public and closely held. Corporate form of organization, partnerships and other associational forms. 
Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and the regulation of securities markets. Topics covered include regulation of securities markets and securities professionals, responsibilities of securities lawyers, continuous reporting, transnational securities fraud, and enforcement of the securities acts.
Explores corporate responsibility and leadership through case studies of contemporary scandals. Reviews business forms and the consequences of an institution failing to comply with legal & ethical duties to employees, shareholders, and the public.
Study of subject-matter jurisdiction of federal courts. 
Provides a practical, hands-on approach to California Civil Procedure through case studies, drafting of common litigation documents, and studying the application of the Code of Civil Procedure to practical case scenarios. Issues of general civil litigation emphasizing bar exam topics are included.
Study of the federal income tax treatment of partnerships and partners; including entities classified as partnerships.
Examine the U.S. income tax laws and policies related to the taxation of foreign income of U.S. persons and U.S. income of foreign persons. 
Opportunity to work in support of the mandate of the United Nations Special Rapporteur in the field of cultural rights.
Build on the knowledge of the workings of the United Nations human rights system they gained in Practicum I, and gain further advanced experience working with UN documents, with individual cases in the field and with thematic reports.
Designed for law students who are native Spanish-speakers or who have achieved proficiency in Spanish through study or experiences in a Spanish-speaking country.  
Survey of the legislative, administrative, and judicial regulation of labor relations under federal law. 
Complements the content of the feminist legal theory course by providing the opportunity to consider how feminist theory may be used to inform law-making.
Introduction to the preparation and trial of cases, featuring lectures, videotapes, demonstrations, assigned readings and forensic drills. Laboratory held on Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday evening.
Train on the organization and presentation of a complex trial, including pretrial preparation, jury selection, strategy considerations, evidentiary issues, and effective handling of plaintiff and defense cases through verdict.
In-depth coverage of two foundational principles of natural resources law: public trust doctrine and private property rights protected under the Takings Clause of the U.S. and many state constitutions. 
Survey of commercial transactions law under the Uniform Commercial Code (UCC). Covers a number of topics under Articles 2, 3, & 9 of the UCC. Topics include attachment and perfection of security interests in personal property and general principles of negotiability. Primary goals are to provide a foundational knowledge and understanding of several articles of the UCC and improve problem-solving skills in this area.
Basic techniques of analysis that are part of the core curriculum in a good business school. Gives background necessary for understanding and advising your clients and for understanding other business-related law school courses.
Basic techniques of analysis that are part of the core curriculum in a good business school. Gives background necessary for understanding and advising your clients and for understanding other business-related law school courses.
Focus on how corporations raise money, stocks and bonds, etc.; how deals are structured and why corporations use one strategy instead of another.  
Focuses on analysis of contract drafting design for various types of transactions and actual transactional documents typically encountered.
Learn special legal rules and concepts applicable to non-profit organizations; particularly IRC 501(c)(3) nonprofits. Combination skills class and lecture class.
Focuses on the state and local laws applicable to nonprofit organizations; i.e., public interest, cultural, religious, educational and other not-for-profit entities.
Focuses on the conceptual basis and substantive law criteria for the federal and state income tax exemption of nonprofit organizations. 
Covers the negotiation and drafting of intellectual property agreements common in the biotechnology and pharmaceutical arena.
Focuses on skills critical to law school success, and ultimately, bar exam success.
Develop essay writing skills and performance test drafting typically employed on the bar examination.  
Skills focused on the development of legal analytical and organizational methods essential to successful completion of the Performance Test component of the California Bar Exam (and other states), and, by extension, to success in the practice of law.
Examines underlying theory and practice in securing compliance with our major environmental laws.  
Examines underlying theory and practice in securing compliance with our major environmental laws.  
Seminar explores in-depth selected topics or problems in constitutional law and theory. The current focus will include diverse topics including abortion rights, the development of Second Amendment jurisprudence, and other subject areas. 
Examines the allocation of national security powers among the three branches of government, and the laws & policies that govern military operations, the collection & use of intelligence, homeland security, and other current national security issues.
Examine several topics that arise in field of information privacy law, with a special emphasis on law enforcement access to this information.
Conducts a closer examination of various topics and subject matters that relate to immigration and citizenship law.
Goal is to prepare future attorneys to effectively represent Spanish-speaking clients through various key tools, including litigation tools, language, culture, and emotional intelligence.
Advanced course covers employment law issues through the lens of public interest lawyers and their constituencies.  
Intensive look at selected issues in Trademark Law, including the concepts of trademarks and unfair competition, acquisition and loss of trademark rights, infringement, trademarks as speech, and international aspects of trademark protection.
Intensive look at selected issues in Trademark Law, including the concepts of trademarks and unfair competition, acquisition and loss of trademark rights, infringement, trademarks as speech, and international aspects of trademark protection.
The Immigration & Nationality Law Review (INLR) is in part a reprint journal and serves as an anthology of seminal articles in immigration, nationality, and citizenship law. INLR has republished a number of articles authored by King Hall faculty. INLR also creates space for student Notes. The INLR also hosts a symposium or other immigration-related project each year and publishes materials from that enterprise in the years volume. 
Participation in interschool moot court and lawyering skills competitions. Competition must be authorized by the appropriate faculty advisor. Faculty advisor may condition the award of academic credit for any particular competition on the performance of such additional work as may be reasonable to justify the credit. May satisfy advanced legal writing requirement
Members of Moot Court Board may receive 1 unit for each semester of service on the board; maximum of 2 units. Credit awarded only after certification by Moot Court Board and approval of the faculty advisors to Moot Court Board.
Members of the King Hall Negotiations Board assist in the administration of the King Hall Negotiation Team by performing a variety of tasks under the supervision of the course instructor. 
Editors must have completed an editorship article and must perform editorial duties (a substantial time commitment). Credit is awarded only after completion of both semesters.
Editors must have completed an editorship article and must perform editorial duties (a substantial time commitment). Credit is awarded only after completion of both semesters.
Clinic provides practical experience in providing legal services to indigent clients who have filed civil rights actions in state and federal trial and appellate courts. Students work on clinic cases under the supervision of the clinic director.
Students may arrange judicial clerkship clinical programs with anapproved list of state and federal judges through the Clinical office and under the sponsorship of the faculty member in charge. All students must complete weekly time records and bi-weekly journals.
Opportunity to work with the Internal Revenue Service or other governmental tax agency. Journals and attendance at group meetings required.
Represent low-income persons in family law and related matters arising out of situations involving family violence. 
Represent low-income persons in family law and related matters arising out of situations involving family violence.
Represent low-income persons in family law and related matters arising out of situations involving family violence.
Provides legal representation to indigent non-citizens in removal proceedings before U.S. Immigration Courts, the Board of Immigration Appeals, and federal courts, including the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals. 
Provides legal representation to indigent non-citizens in removal proceedings before U.S. Immigration Courts, the Board of Immigration Appeals, and federal courts, including the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals. 
Practical experience in the operation of the office of a legislator or a legislative committee. The major thrust of the program is to enable students to become familiar with the give and take realities of making laws, as contracted with
Aoki Water Justice Clinic trains students to use community lawyering and transactional legal tools to ensure that low-income, California communities receive safe, clean, and affordable drinking water.
Practical experience in environmental law. Students will work in an approved government, non-profit or private law office engaged in some form of environmental law work for a minimum of eight hours per week. Students must prepare a journal describing and reflecting upon their clinical experience, and meet periodically with the instructor.
Practical experience in employment relations, including employment discrimination and public sector labor law. Work under the direct supervision of a government lawyer. Opportunity to participate in a range of with emphasis on observation and participation in actual investigation, interviewing, drafting pleading, and attendance at hearings.
Opportunity to work with a public interest practitioner in a nonprofit organization. Journals and attendance at two group meetings required. Students must complete an evaluative final paper of approximately eight pages. Hours completed in public interest setting may be applied toward the practicum requirement for the Public interest Law Program.
Opportunity to work for government, academic, and nonprofit entities. 
Gain practical experience working full or part time in a District Attorneys or Public Defenders office in one of several surrounding counties or in a federal Public Defender or U.S. Attorneys office. Participate in the many activities associated with the office for which they extern: observation, interviewing, research, counseling, motion practice, and trials under State Bar rules.
Provides practical experience in providing legal services to real clients who have various problems related to their incarceration in state prison. The services require analysis and application of Constitutional Law, state statutory law, agency regulations, and the rules of professional responsibility. 
Participants assist in instructing the Legal Research and Writing programs for first-year students under the direction of the Legal Research and Writing instructors.
Assist the faculty in Lawyering Skills course for first-year students. Approval of the Lawyering Skills instructor is required for enrollment. Grading is on a satisfactory/unsatisfactory basis.
Groups of students with common interest in studying a stated legal problem may plan and conduct their own research and seminar program under the direction of faculty. 
Groups of students with common interest in studying a stated legal problem may plan and conduct their own research and seminar program under the direction of faculty. 
Introduction to landscape architectural representation techniques. Fundamentals of orthographic drafting, freehand drawing, photography, and basic digital representation.
Instruction of methods to explore and communicate landscape design intentions through digital media
Introduction to ecological concepts, including nutrient dynamics, population regulation, community structure, ecosystem function. Principles will be applied to human activities such as biological conservation, ecological restoration, landscape planning, and management. Weekly lab devoted to field exercises in local ecosystems. 
Introduction of landform and topography as landscape medium and utilization of grading and drainage to design meaningful and functional spaces. Intro to site analysis and site planning, with specific attention to topography.
Introduction to basic principles of design towards the creation of space. Design methodologies and skills to define, manipulate, and represent the built environment. Workshops in 3D physical modeling for spacemaking.
Directed group study.

Provides exploration of contemporary theories and philosophies impacting design of landscapes and the built environment. Includes exploring competing definitions of "landscape," "nature," and "culture."
Research, design, and planning methods employed in landscape architecture. Exercises allow students to design independent landscape research. Lectures provide a historical overview of research methodology. 
Provides hands-on workshop environment to explore advanced representation and modeling skills.  Digital drawing explored as an analytical research method and generative design technique for creating presentation graphics. 
Sustainable design and construction techniques at site and building scales. Emphasizes real-world case studies, analysis of opportunities for actual sites, and application of LEED and Sustainable Sites green rating systems.
Introduction to community participation and design. Incorporates social and cultural factors, public and community processes, theories and practices related to human-environment behavior; community involvement in design, social analysis, community engagement, accessibility, diversity and politics of place.
Capstone class examines case studies and techniques of sustainable development. Student teams will develop detailed proposals for real-world sites.
Introduction to the spatial design and construction of small-scale projects. Hands-on approach to learning and understanding materials (including wood, concrete, and stone) and methods in landscape construction, and the application of technical skills (including detailing, cost estimation, and specifications).
Legal and professional aspects of landscape architecture, including the development of construction documents (drawings and specifications), proposal writing, fee calculations, project management, cost estimation, and insurance.
Application of place-making and problem-solving skills to local landscape sites. Analysis of social and environmental conditions in the field. Lectures link design projects to contemporary theories and practices. 
Studio designing large-scale landscapes at regional, sub-regional, and neighborhood scales. Focuses on understanding complex social, economic, and environmental factors, developing sustainability priorities and strategies, and applying them through design and policy.
Application of advanced theories and methods of design and planning to real-world projects.
Landscape architecture studio featuring advanced studies and applications of creative work, design, technology and/or theory. One day-long field trip required.
Landscape architecture studio featuring advanced studies and applications of creative work, design, technology and/or theory. One day-long field trip required.
Capstone studio that synthesizes learning objectives within the senior-level Landscape Architecture studio sequence. Students required to apply creative problem solving, design theory, technology, and representation skills towards a design approach that addresses complex, real-world environmental design problems.
Faculty initiated workshops featuring advanced studies and applications of original work in landscape architecture. May be taught abroad.
Professional field experience in landscape architecture.
Projects will focus on a critical area of landscape architectural design, planning, planning, analysis, communication, or research. Required of all Landscape Architecture majors.
Projects will focus on a critical area of landscape architectural design, planning, analysis, communication, or research. Required of all Landscape Architecture majors.
Tutoring in Landscape Architecture courses.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.

Introduction to seminal works in political theory, philosophy, and the social sciences that focus on citizenship and the public sphere; development of critical perspective regarding restructuring of public space in a pluralistic and global culture; discussion of contemporary case studies.
Examines the major theories of environmental design. Epistemology of design serves as framework to examine modern landscape architecture, architecture, urban design and planning. Normative theories of design are reviewed along with the social and environmental sciences.
Real-world designed environment situations where creative activity and/or basic research is the primary product.
Exposes students to real-world, designed-environment situations where creative activity and/or basic research is the primary product. Advanced landscape problems will be utilized at the site, urban or rural scale.
Factors that influence human's interaction with their surroundings and the mechanisms used for recognizing and addressing general and specific human needs in community design and development decisions.
Focus is on land planning, design, and management techniques to further the goal of resource preservation. Examines current critical theory in the establishment and management of conservation areas.
Seminar on selected topics in landscape architecture research, analysis, planning, design, communication, or education.
Opportunity for students to work directly in the field with academicsat other institutions or with professionals in an office setting. Gives experience beyond the confines of campus and allows direct interaction with the community.

Directed group study of topic in English as a Second Language (ESL).
Intended for lower division students.
Intended for lower division students.
Introduction to fundamental methods and concepts used in linguistic analysis, focusing on phonetic, phonological, and morphological phenomena. Emphasizes development of analytical skills and appreciation of structural regularities and differences among languages. 
Introduction to fundamental methods and concepts used in linguistic analysis, focusing on morphological, syntactic, and semantic phenomena. Emphasizes development of analytical skills and appreciation of structural regularities and differences among languages. 
Detailed examination of a major contemporary linguistic theory, a major contemporary issue or related set of issues in linguistics, or the structure of a particular language or language family.
Survey of present-day English grammar as informed by contemporary linguistic theories. The major syntactic structures of English; their variation across dialects, styles, and registers; their development; and their usefulness in describing the conventions of English.
Contemporary phonological theory with emphasis on syllable structure, metrical structure, phonology-morphology interaction, and typological variation in these areas, from the perspective of optimality-theoretic approaches.
Detailed examination of articulatory and acoustic phonetics.
Introduction to the analysis of word structure and the relation of word structure to the lexicon and other grammatical components.
Investigation of the lexical organization of human languages through corpus linguistics. Application of principles of linguistic analysis, automatic text processing, and statistical research to solving problems of textual evaluation and classification, as well as information retrieval and extraction. 
Introduction to syntactic theory, primarily through the examination of a major theory of syntax, emphasizing theoretical reasoning, argumentation, and problems of theory building in syntax.
Linguistic study of meanings of words and phrases. Meanings expressed by lexical items and derivational and inflectional morphology. Contribution of argument structure, quantification, and coordination to meaning.
Survey of the world's languages, their geographical distribution and classification, both genetic and typological.  Illustrative descriptions of several major languages from different geographical areas; pidgins and creoles, lingua francas and other languages of widespread use.
Description and methods of the historical study of language, including the comparative method and internal reconstruction; sound change, morphological change, syntactic change, semantic change.
Investigation into common features of all human languages and the classification of languages in terms of their structural features. Theories of universal grammar. Detailed discussion of non-Indo-European languages and comparison with English.
Explores the forms of American English: traditional notions of regional dialects and increasingly important social dialects, reflecting age, class, gender, race, ethnicity, and sexual orientation. Influence of language attitudes on perception of dialect speakers; dialect in media, education, and literature.
Investigation of real and putative (stereotyped) gender-linked differences in language structure and usage, with a consideration of some social and psychological consequences of such differences. Focus is on English, but other languages are also discussed.
Linguistic features of the varieties of the Spanish language spoken throughout the United States; phonology, morphology, syntax, vocabulary. Focus on the relationship between United States Spanish and other world varieties of Spanish, within a historical framework.
Introduction to psychological issues relating to the implementationof language and linguistic structure during speech production and comprehension and to the implications of research in psychology and related fields for linguistic theory.
Theory and research on children's acquisition of their native language, including the sound system, grammatical systems, and basic semantic categories. 
Overview of issues in the field of neurolinguistics and techniques used to explore representation of language in the human brain.
Understanding the nature of language through computer modeling of linguistic abilities.  Relationships between human cognition and computer representations of cognitive processing.
Psycholinguistic and sociolinguistic theories of second language learning. Connections between theoretical perspectives and pedagogical practices in formal and informal second language settings, with focus on tutoring. Impact of sociocontextual factors (e.g., gender, ethnicity). Fieldwork requirement.
Internship applying linguistic-related skills to a fieldwork project in areas such as media, law, or industry, in approved organizations or institutions. Maximum of 4 units applicable toward major.
Guided research, under the direction of a faculty member approved by the Program Director, leading to a senior honors thesis.
Leading of small voluntary discussion groups affiliated with one of the department's regular courses.

Survey of fundamental issues raised by pre-generative linguistics in the 20th century, with emphasis on issues crucial to applications of linguistics.
Survey of fundamental issues raised by orthodox generative linguistics, with emphasis on issues crucial to  applications of linguistics.
Survey of fundamental issues raised by contemporary linguistic theories lying outside the generative grammar orthodoxy, with emphasis on issues crucial to applications of linguistics.
Advanced study of current problems in linguistic theory and methodology. 
Advanced study of current problems in linguistic theory and methodology. 
Advanced study of current problems in linguistic theory and methodology. 
Advanced study of current problems in linguistic theory and methodology.
Critical examination of current phonological theories.
Advanced investigation of the physiological basis of speech articulation and acoustic phonetics.
Critical survey of contemporary theories of syntax.
Advanced critical exploration of contemporary theories of linguistic semantics.
Advanced analysis of the theory and methods of historical linguistics.
Examination of the development of the Romance languages from Proto-Romance to the modern era. Application and critical examination ofmethods of historical and comparative linguistics in particular areas of structural change in Romance.
Linguistic variability in time, space, and society. Theoretical issues related to social and linguistic constraints in variation; issues and methods in the quantitative analysis of variation. Speech community, quantitative analytic methods, and the scope of sociolinguistic competence.
Introduction to and application of leading theoretical approaches to the analysis of discourse. Approaches to the analysis of (spoken and written) text in context, tools for analyzing different types of texts (narration, conversation, etc.). Theme/rheme, given/new, anaphora, discourse markers, and other lexical/grammatical features.
Exploration of the construction and performance of gender through language in cross-cultural perspective and in a variety of contexts: informal conversations, narratives, workplaces, schools, households, the mass media. Special topics may include: language acquisition; multilingualism; ecofeminism; queer theory.
Covers theoretical perspectives that direct or have directed research in second language acquisition; explores the relationship between linguistics and language teaching and deals with the individual variables that influence second language learning.
Students will study a variety of research methods in second language research; evaluate research designs and methods of analyses, formulate research questions and hypotheses and design a study of their own, think about various kinds of data they can collect.
Pedagogical implications of various theories of second language acquisition, facilitation of language acquisition in classroom settings, and techniques for conducting classroom-based research in language learning.
Teaching classes for ESL graduate students. Aiding the ESL undergraduate composition classes; tutoring foreign graduate student Teaching Assistants in pronunciation. Does not fulfill requirement toward the M.A. degree.

Methods of teaching second languages to nonnative speakers, stressing particularly recent linguistic methodology and techniques, as related to teaching and tutoring in the UC Davis ESL program.
Methods of teaching advanced academic literacy in a second language, with a focus on ESL composition.  Lesson development, teaching and tutoring in the UC Davis ESL program.
Review of recent research in second language acquisition and the teaching of English to speakers of other languages. Continued teaching and tutoring in the UC Davis ESL clinic. Each student designs and reports on a classroom research project.
Exploration of literacy theory and critical pedagogy in relation to new instructional and communication technologies. Practicum experience in teaching second language literacy; reflection on connections between theory and practice. Fieldwork requirement.
Current issues in second language pedagogy, with a focus on communicative methodology, participatory curriculum design, academic literacy, and the social contexts of teaching. Emphasis on reflective teaching and action research. Mentoring of new language teachers.

Directed group study.
Directed group study.
Design and analysis of engineering experiments with emphasis on measurement standards, data analysis, regressions and general and detailed uncertainty analysis, including statistical treatment of experimental data intervals, propagation of bias and precision errors, correlated bias approximations, and using jitter programs.
Development of differential equations governing continuity, momentum and energy transfer. Solutions in laminar flow for exact cases, low and high Reynolds numbers and lubrication theory. Dynamics of inviscid flow.
Study of stability and transition to turbulence. Introduction to the physics of turbulence. Modeling of turbulence for numerical determination of momentum and heat transfer.
Design aspects of selected topics such as: heat conduction, fins; heat transport in ducts, boundary layers and separated flows; heat exchangers.
Application of principles of heat and mass transfer to biomedical systems related to heat exchange between the biomedical system and its environment, mass transfer across cell membranes and the design and analysis of artificial human organs.
Methods of analyzing turbulence; kinematics and dynamics of homogeneous turbulence; Reynolds stress and heat-flux equations; second order closures and their simplification; numerical methods; application to boundary layer-type flows; two-dimensional and three-dimensional hydraulic and environmental flows.
Study of topics important to energy conversion systems, propulsion and other systems using high temperature gases. Classical thermodynamicsand quantum statistical mechanics of nonreacting and chemically reacting gases, gas mixtures, and other substances.
Review of chemical thermodynamics and chemical kinetics. Discussion of reacting flows, their governing equations and transport phenomena; detonations; laminar flame structure and turbulent combustion.
Review of options available for advanced power generation. Detailed study of basic power balances, component efficiencies, and overall powerplant performance for one advanced concept such as a fusion, magnetohydrodynamic, or solar electric powerplant.
Scientific calculations with finite element and finite difference methods for multi-dimensional problems in solid and fluid dynamics are performed with examples in C, C++, FORTRAN, and MATLAB script files. Derivation of the basic equations of motion in finite volume form with applications to elasticity, waves.
Multiple degrees of freedom; damping measures; Rayleigh's method; vibration absorbers; eigenvalues and modeshapes; modal coordinates; forced vibrations; random processes and vibrations; autocorrelation;spectral density; first passage and fatigue failure; nonlinear systems; phase plane.
Dynamics of particles, rigid bodies and distributed systems with engineering applications; generalized coordinates; Hamilton's principle; Lagrange's equations; Hamilton-Jacobi theory; modal dynamics orthogonality; wave dynamics; dispersion.
Coupled rigid-body kinematics/dynamics; reference frames; vector differentiation; configuration and motion constraints; holonomicity; generalized speeds; partial velocities; mass; inertia tensor/theorems; angular momentum; generalized forces; comparing Newton/Euler, Lagrange's, Kane's methods; computer-aided equation derivation; orientation; Euler; Rodrigues parameters.
Spatial kinematics, screw theory, spatial mechanisms analysis and synthesis, robot kinematics and dynamics, robot workspace, path planning, robot programming, real-time architecture and software implementation.
Description of sound using normal modes and waves; interaction between vibrating solids and sound fields; sound absorption in enclosed spaces; sound transmission through barriers; applications in design, acoustic enclosures and sound walls, room acoustics, design of quiet machinery.
Ideal for beginning graduate or advanced undergraduate students interested in microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) topics related to biological applications. Covers topics from various disciplines related to BioMEMS: mechanical, electrical, biomedical, chemical engineering, and materials science.
Mechanical design of micro-electronmechanical systems (MEMS). Device modeling: lumped parameter models; energy methods; nonlinearities; electrical and mechanical noise sources. Actuation and measurement methods: capacitive, piezoresistive, thermal, piezoelectric, and optical techniques.  Review of basic electronics: bridge circuits, amplitude modulation; lock-in detection.
Overview of the mechanical properties of the various tissues in the musculoskeletal system, the relationship of these properties to anatomic and histologic structure, and the changes in these properties caused by aging and disease. Tissues covered include bone, cartilage and synovial fluid, ligament and tendon.
Analysis and numerical simulation of road vehicles with on design applications.
Modeling and analysis methodology for composite structures including response and failure. Laminated plate bending theory. Introduction to failure processes. Includes discussion of aerospace structural analysis.
Application of aerodynamic theory to obtain optimum aerodynamic shapes. Both analytic solutions and solutions obtained with numerical optimization techniques will be examined. Includes introduction to the calculus of variations and numerical optimization techniques.
Introduction to advanced finite elements and design optimization methods, with application to modeling of complex mechanical, aerospace and biomedical systems. Application of states of the art in finite elements in optimum design of components under realistic loading conditions and constraints.  
Deformation of solids and the motion of fluids treated with state-of-the-art computational methods. Numerical treatment of nonlinear dynamics; classification of coupled problems; applications of finite element methods to mechanical, aeronautical, and biological systems.
Static stability of thin-walled aerospace structures treated from both theoretical and practical design perspectives. Both monolithic and composite construction considered. Buckling of stiffened panels, shells and thin-walled beams, experimental methods and failure/crippling processes.
Survey of biodevice design from engineering and biological perspectives; micro-/nano-fabrication techniques; surface science and mass transport; essential biological processes and models; proposal development skills on merging aforementioned themes. 
Preliminary aerodynamic design of axial and radial flow compressors and turbines. Design of diffusers. Selection of turbomachine  and configurations and approximations to optimum dimensions and flow angles. Introduction to through flow analysis. Rotating stall and surge, andaeromechanical considerations.
Applications of advanced techniques of solid mechanics to mechanical design problems. Coverage of advanced topics in stress analysis andstatic failure theories with emphasis in design of machine elements. Design projects emphasizing advanced analysis tools for life cycle evaluation.
Applications of advanced techniques of solid mechanics to mechanical design problems. Advanced topics in variational methods of mechanics with emphasis in design of machine elements. Design projects emphasizingadvanced analysis tools.
Occurrence, mechanisms, and prediction of fatigue and fracture phenomenon. Use of stress and strain to predict crack initiation. Use of fracture mechanics to predict failure and crack propagation. Effects of stress concentration, manufacturing, load sequence, irregular loading, and multi-axial loading.
Motion mechanism design, electric actuator, power electronics motion contol, sensor technologies, personal computer-based control systems design, motion control general operating system and real time operating systems, motion control software design, discrete event control software design.
Computational principles for sensing, reasoning, and navigation for autonomous robots.  
Develops the mathematical theory underlying growth, structure and function of networks with applications to physical, social, biological and engineered systems. Topics include network growth, resilience, epidemiology, phase transitions, software and algorithms, routing and search control, cascading failures.
Principle and design of engineering software. Advanced topics in engineering software design, applications of object-oriented programming, very high-level languages, real-time multi-thread computing and sensor fusion, Web-based network computing, graphics, and GUI in engineering.
Representation and processing of geometrical information in design and manufacturing. Numeric and symbolic computations.  Coordinate systems and transformations. Bezier and B-spline curves and surfaces. Interpolation and approximation methods.  Intersections, offsets, and blends. Path planning for machining, inspection, and robotics applications.
Advanced vehicle design for fuel economy, performance, and low emissions, considering regulations, societal demands and manufacturability. Analysis and verification of computer design and control of vehicle systems in real vehicle tests. Advanced engine concepts.
Study of invicid and viscous flows about aerodynamic shapes at subsonic,transonic and supersonic conditions. Application of aerodynamic theory to design for reduced drag and increased lift.
Introduction to numerical methods for solution of fluid flow problems. Discretization techniques and solution algorithms. Finite difference solutions to classical model equations pertinent to wave phenomena, diffusion phenomena, or equilibrium. Application to the incompressible Navier-Stokes equation.
Programming languages and constructs for engineering analysis on parallel computers including MPI (distributed), OpenMP (shared), and Fortran95.  
Fundamentals for understanding the conversion of wind power to mechanical power and electricity. Related engineering, economic and societal issues.
Basics of electrochemistry and fuel cell engines in mobile and stationary applications. Aspects of fuel cell energy converters and their subsystems including practice with existing fuel cell and hydrogen systems on campus.
Multiport models of mechanical, electrical, hydraulic, and thermal devices; bond graphs, block diagrams and state space equations; modeling of multiple energy domain systems; three-dimensional mechanics; digital simulation laboratory.
Mathematical representations of linear dynamical systems. Feedback principles; benefits and cost of feedback. Analysis and design of control systems based on classical and modern approaches, with emphasis on applications to mechanical and aeronautical systems.
Analysis and design of SISO (Single Input Single Output) feedback control systems utilizing Youla Parameterization technique. Optimal control concepts (controllability, observability, Linear Quadratic Regulator) and an introduction to Kalman filtering and robust optimal control theory for designing H2/LQG and Hinf controllers. 
Analysis and design of MIMO (Multiple Input Multiple Output) feedback control systems utilizing Youla Parameterization technique. Uncertainty modeling and  MIMO feedback control system design using loop shaping with Hinf/H2 system norm optimization techniques. 
Discrete systems analysis; digital filtering; sample data systems; state space and transform design techniques; quantization effects; multi-input, multi-output systems.
Introduction to Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS). Challenges in guiding and controlling limited-payload small and miniature aircraft systems. Coordinate frames, kinematics and dynamics, linear design models, autopilot design, sensor models, state estimation, design model for guidance, straight-line and orbit following, and path planning.
Individual and/or group conference on problems, progress, and techniques in mechanical and aeronautical engineering research.
Current topics in engineering including developments in mechanical and aeronautical engineering with presentations by students, faculty, and visitors.

Methods of leading discussion groups or laboratory sections, writing and grading quizzes, use of laboratory equipment, and grading laboratory reports.

Topics selected for their use in calculus, including functions and their graphs, slope, zeroes of polynomials, exponential, logarithmic and trigonometric functions, sketching surfaces and solids.
Limits; differentiation of algebraic functions; analytic geometry; applications, in particular to maxima and minima problems.
Integration; calculus for trigonometric, exponential, and logarithmic functions; applications.  
Differential equations; partial derivatives; double integrals; applications; series.
Introduction to differential calculus via applications in biology and medicine. Limits, derivatives of polynomials, trigonometric, and exponential functions, graphing, applications of the derivative to biology and medicine.
Introduction to integral calculus and elementary differential equations via applications to biology and medicine. Fundamental theorem of calculus, techniques of integration including integral tables and numerical methods, improper integrals, elementary first order differential equations, applications in biology and medicine.
Matrix algebra, functions of several variables, partial derivatives, systems of differential equations, and applications to biology and medicine.
Functions, limits, continuity. Slope and derivative. Differentiation of algebraic and transcendental functions. Applications to motion, natural growth, graphing, extrema of a function. Differentials. L'Hopital's rule.
More intensive treatment of material covered in MAT 021A.
Functions, limits, continuity. Slope and derivative. Same course content as MAT 021A. Enrollment for students in the Emerging Scholars Program by instructor's invitation only.
Continuation of MAT 021A. Definition of definite integral, fundamental theorem of calculus, techniques of integration. Application to area, volume, arc length, average of a function, improper integral, surface of revolution.
More intensive treatment of material covered in MAT 021B. Students completing MAT 021BH can continue with MAT 021CH or the regular MAT 021C.
Continuation of MAT 021A. Same course content as MAT 021B.  Enrollment for students in the Emerging Scholars Program by instructor's invitation only.
Continuation of MAT 021B. Sequences, series, tests for convergence, Taylor expansions. Vector algebra, vector calculus, scalar and vector fields. Partial derivatives, total differentials. Applications to maximum and minimum problems in two or more variables. Applications to physical systems. 
More intensive treatment of material covered in MAT 021C.
Continuation of MAT 021B. Same course content as MAT 021C.  Enrollment for students in the Emerging Scholars Program by instructor's invitation only.
Continuation of MAT 021C. Definite integrals over plane and solid regions in various coordinate systems. Line and surface integrals. Green's theorem, Stoke's theorem, divergence theorem.
Accelerated treatment of material from MAT 021A and MAT 021B, with detailed presentation of theory, definitions, and proofs, and treatment of computational aspects of calculus at a condensed but sophisticated level.
Matrices and linear transformations, determinants, eigenvalues, eigenvectors, diagonalization, factorization.
Introduction to MATLAB and its use in linear algebra.
Solutions of elementary differential equations.
Introduction to the rigorous treatment of abstract mathematical analysis. Proofs in mathematics, induction, sets, cardinality; real number system, theory of convergence of sequences.
Introduction to linear algebra with biological, medical, and bioengineering applications. Matrix algebra, vector spaces, orthogonality, determinants, eigenvalues, eigenvectors, principal component analysis, singular value decomposition, and linear transformations. Computer labs cover mathematical and computational techniques for modeling biological systems.
Solutions of differential equations with biological, medical, and bioengineering applications. First and second order linear equations, phase plane analysis, nonlinear dynamics, Laplace transforms, and the diffusion equation. Computer labs cover mathematical and numerical techniques for modeling biological systems.
Introduction to fundamental mathematical ideas selected from the principal areas of modern mathematics. Properties of the primes, the fundamental theorems of arithmetic, properties of the rationals and irrationals, binary and other number systems.
Rigorous treatment of linear algebra; topics include vector spaces, bases and dimensions, orthogonal projections, eigenvalues and eigenvectors, similarity transformations, singular value decomposition and positive definiteness.
Weekly explorations of mathematical ideas related to the elementary school curriculum will be carried out by cooperative learning groups. Lectures will provide background and synthesize the results of group exploration.
Weekly explorations of mathematical ideas related to the elementary school curriculum will be carried out by cooperative learning groups. Lectures will provide background and synthesize the results of group exploration.
Solve and present solutions to challenging and interesting problems in elementary mathematics.  


Introduction to probability theory and stochastic processes with biological, medical, and bioengineering applications. Combinatorics, discrete and continuous random variables, Bayes formula, conditional probability, Markov chains, Poisson processes, and Brownian motion. Computer labs cover mathematical and computational modeling techniques.
Rigorous treatment of mathematical concepts with emphasis on developing the ability to understand abstract mathematical ideas, to read and write mathematical concepts, and to prove theorems. Designed to serve as preparation for the more rigorous upper division courses.
History of mathematics from ancient times through the development of calculus. Mathematics from Arab, Hindu, Chinese and other cultures. Selected topics from the history of modern mathematics.
Topics selected from the theory of convex bodies, convex functions, geometric inequalities, combinatorial geometry, and integral geometry. Designed to serve as preparation for the more rigorous upper division courses.
Divisibility and related topics, diophantine equations, selected topics from the theory of prime numbers. Designed to serve as preparation for the more rigorous upper division courses.
Euler function, Moebius function, congruences, primitive roots, quadratic reciprocity law.  
Vector analysis, curves, and surfaces in three dimensions.  
Derivation of partial differential equations; separation of variables; equilibrium solutions and Laplace's equation; Fourier series; method of characteristics for the one dimensional wave equation.  Solution of nonhomogeneous equations.  
Sturm-Liouville Theory; selfadjoint operators; mixed boundary conditions; partial differential equations in two and three dimensions;Eigenvalue problems in circular domains; nonhomogeneous problems and the method of eigenfunction expansions; Poisson's Equations.
Green's functions for one-dimensional problems and Poisson's equation; Fourier transforms; Green's Functions for time dependent problems; Laplace transform and solution of partial differential equations.
Scalar and planar autonomous systems; nonlinear systems and linearization; existence and uniqueness of solutions; matrix solution of linear systems; phase plane analysis; stability analysis; bifurcation theory; Liapunov's method; limit cycles; Poincare Bendixon theory.
Lorentz equations; Poincare maps; center manifolds and normal forms; scalar and planar maps; phase space analysis for iterated maps; period-doubling bifurcation; Lyapunov exponent; chaos and symbolic dynamics; strange attractors; fractals.
Methods of mathematical modeling of biological systems including difference equations, ordinary differential equations, stochastic and dynamic programming models.  Computer simulation methods applied to biological systems.  Applications to population growth, cell biology, physiology, evolutionary ecology and protein clustering.  MATLAB programming required.
Functions, limits of functions, continuity and uniform continuity, sequences of functions, series of real numbers, series of functions, power series.
Theory of the derivative, Taylor series, integration, partial derivatives, Implicit Function Theorem.
Real numbers, sequences, series, and continuous functions.
Derivatives, integrals, sequences of functions, and power series.
Metric spaces and multi-variable calculus.
Error analysis, approximation, interpolation, numerical differentiation and integration. Programming in language such as Pascal, Fortran, or BASIC required.
Solution of nonlinear equations and nonlinear systems. Minimization of functions of several variables. Simultaneous linear equations. Eigenvalue problems. Linear programming. Programming in language such as Pascal, Fortran, or BASIC required.
Difference equations, operators, numerical solutions of ordinary and partial differential equations. Programming in language such as Pascal, Fortran, or BASIC required.
Fourier series and integrals, orthogonal sets of functions. Topics selected from trigonometric approximation, orthogonal polynomials, applications to signal and image processing, numerical analysis, and differential equations.  
Analysis and evaluation of deterministic and random cash flow streams, yield and pricing of basic financial instruments, interest rate theory, mean-variance portfolio theory, capital asset pricing models, utility functions and general principles. MATLAB programming required.
Probability space; discrete probability, combinatorial analysis; independence, conditional probability; random variables, discrete and continuous distributions, probability mass function, joint and marginal density functions; expectation, moments, variance, Chebyshev inequality; sums of random variables, random walk, large number law, central limit theorem.
Generating functions, branching processes, characteristic function; Markov chains; convergence of random variables, law of iterated logarithm; random processes, Brownian motion, stationary processes, renewal processes, queueing theory, martingales.  
Axiomatic and analytic examination of Euclidean geometry from an advanced point of view.  In particular, a discussion of its relation to other geometries. Designed to serve as preparation for the more rigorous upper division courses.
Combinatorial methods using basic graph theory, counting methods, generating functions, and recurrence relations. Designed to serve as preparation for the more rigorous upper division courses.
Enumeration, Polya theory, generating functions, current topics in algebraic combinatorics.
Basic notions of point-set and combinatorial topology.  
Coding theory, error correcting codes, finite fields and the algebraic concepts needed in their development.
Basic concepts of groups, symmetries of the plane. Emphasis on the techniques used in the proof of the ideas (Lemmas, Theorems, etc.) developing these concepts. Precise thinking, proof writing, and the ability to deal with abstraction. 
Bilinear forms, rings, factorization, modules.
Group representations, fields, Galois theory.
Relational model; relational algebra, relational calculus, normal forms, functional and multivalued dependencies, separability. Cost benefit analysis of physical database design and reorganization. Performance via analytical modeling, simulation, and queueing theory. Block accesses; buffering; operating system contention; CPU intensive operations.  
Introduction to computational mathematics, symbolic computation, and computer generated/verified proofs in algebra, analysis and geometry. Investigation of rigorous new mathematics developed in conjunction with modern computational questions and the role that computers play in mathematical conjecture and experimentation.  
Applications of linear algebra; LU and QR matrix factorizations, eigenvalue and singular value matrix decompositions. 
Linear programming, simplex method. Basic properties of unconstrained nonlinear problems, descent methods, conjugate direction method. Constrained minimization. Programming language required. 
Special topics from various fields of modern, pure, and applied mathematics.  Some recent topics include Knot Theory, General Relativity, and Fuzzy Sets.
Complex number system, analyticity and the Cauchy-Riemann equations, elementary functions, complex integration, power and Laurent series expansions, residue theory.  
Analytical functions, elementary functions and their mapping properties, applications of Cauchy's integral theorem, conformal mapping and applications to heat flow and fluid mechanics. 
Solution and presentation of advanced problem solving techniques. Solve and present interesting and challenging problems of all areas of mathematics.
Supervised work experience in applied mathematics. Final report.
Independent research under supervision of a faculty member. Student will submit written report in thesis form.
Special projects in mathematical education developing techniques for mathematics instruction and tutoring on an individual or small group basis.

Problem-solving in graduate analysis: continuous functions, metric spaces, Banach & Hilbert spaces, bounded linear operators, the spectral theorem, distributions, Fourier series & transforms, Lp spaces, Sobolev spaces.
Metric and normed spaces. Continuous functions. Topological, Hilbert, and Banach spaces. Fourier series. Spectrum of bounded and compact linear operators. Linear differential operators and Green's functions. Distributions. Fourier transform. Measure theory. Lp and Sobolev spaces. Differential calculus and variational methods.
Metric and normed spaces. Continuous functions. Topological, Hilbert, and Banach spaces. Fourier series. Spectrum of bounded and compact linear operators. Linear differential operators and Green's functions. Distributions. Fourier transform. Measure theory. Lp and Sobolev spaces. Differential calculus and variational methods.
Metric and normed spaces. Continuous functions. Topological, Hilbert, and Banach spaces. Fourier series. Spectrum of bounded and compact linear operators. Linear differential operators and Green's functions. Distributions. Fourier transform. Measure theory. Lp and Sobolev spaces. Differential calculus and variational methods.
Hahn-Banach, Open mapping, Closed graph, Banach-Steinhaus, and Krein-Milman. Subspaces and quotient spaces. Projections. Weak and weak-star topologies. Compact and adjoint operators in Banach spaces. Fredholm theory. Functions of operators. Spectral theory of self-adjoint operators. 
Analytic continuation, Riemann surfaces, conformal mappings, Riemann mapping theorem, entire functions, special functions, elliptic functions. 
Cauchy's theorem, Cauchy's integral formulas, meromorphic functions, complex logarithm, entire functions, Weierstrass infinite product formula, the gamma and zeta functions, and prime number theorem. 
Conformal mappings, the Schwarz lemma, analytic automorphisms, the Riemann mapping theorem, elliptic functions, Eisenstein series, the Jacobi theta functions, asymptotics, Bessel functions, the Airy function, topics on special functions and Riemann surfaces. 
Introduction to measure theory.  The study of lengths, surface areas, and volumes in general spaces, as related to integration theory.
Ordinary differential equations and dynamical systems. Variational principles. Eigenfunctions, integral equations and Green's functions. Complex analysis and contour integration. Laplace's equation. Diffusion equations. Wave phenomena. Dimensional analysis and scaling. Asymptotic expansions and perturbation theory. Stochastic processes and Brownian motion.
Ordinary differential equations and dynamical systems. Variational principles. Eigenfunctions, integral equations and Green's functions. Complex analysis and contour integration. Laplace's equation.  Diffusion equations. Wave phenomena. Dimensional analysis and scaling. Asymptotic expansions and perturbation theory. Stochastic processes and Brownian motion.
Ordinary differential equations and dynamical systems. Variational principles. Eigenfunctions, integral equations and Green's functions. Complex analysis and contour integration. Laplace's equation. Diffusion equations. Wave phenomena. Dimensional analysis and scaling. Asymptotic expansions and perturbation theory. Stochastic processes and Brownian motion.
Fundamental group and covering space theory. Homology and cohomology. Manifolds and duality. CW complexes. Fixed point theorems.
Fundamental group and covering space theory. Homology and cohomology. Manifolds and duality. CW complexes. Fixed point theorems. 
Fundamental group and covering space theory. Homology and cohomology. Manifolds and duality. CW complexes. Fixed point theorems. 
Topology of two- and three-dimensional manifolds. Surfaces and their diffeomorphisms. Dehn twists. Heegaard surfaces. Theory of 3-dimensional manifolds. Knots and knot theory. Hyperbolic manifolds and geometric structures.
Year-long sequence on PDEs which covers linear transport, Laplace, heat, and wave equations, maximum principles, method of characteristics, Sobelev and Hlder space theory, weak derivatives, semilinear, quasilinear, and fully nonlinear elliptic/parabolic equations, nonlinear hyperbolic equations, and compensated compactness.
Year-long sequence on PDEs which covers linear transport, Laplace, heat, and wave equations, maximum principles, method of characteristics, Sobelev and Hlder space theory, weak derivatives, semilinear, quasilinear, and fully nonlinear elliptic/parabolic equations, nonlinear hyperbolic equations, and compensated compactness.
Year-long sequence on PDEs which covers linear transport, Laplace, heat, and wave equations, maximum principles, method of characteristics, Sobelev and Hlder space theory, weak derivatives, semilinear, quasilinear, and fully nonlinear elliptic/parabolic equations, nonlinear hyperbolic equations, and compensated compactness.
Kinematics and dynamics of fluids. The Euler and Navier-Stokes equations. Vorticity dynamics. Irrotational flow. Low Reynolds number flows and the Stokes equations. High Reynolds number flows and boundary layers. Compressible fluids. Shock waves. 
Kinematics and dynamics of fluids. The Euler and Navier-Stokes equations. Vorticity dynamics. Irrotational flow. Low Reynolds number flows and the Stokes equations. High Reynolds number flows and boundary layers. Compressible fluids. Shock waves. 
Fundamental principles and methods in numerical analysis, including the concepts of stability of algorithms and conditioning of numerical problems, numerical methods for interpolation and integration, eigenvalue problems, singular value decomposition and its applications.
Numerical methods for large-scale matrix computations, including direct and iterative methods for the solution of linear systems, the computation of eigenvalues and singular values, the solution of least-squares problems, matrix compression, methods for the solution of linear programs.
Numerical methods for the solution of ordinary differential equations, including methods for initial-value problems and two-point boundary-value problems, theory of and methods for differential algebraic equations, dimension reduction of large-scale dynamical systems. 
Nonlinear ordinary and partial differential equations and stochastic processes of cell and molecular biology. Scaling, qualitative, and numerical analysis of mathematical models. Applications to nerve impulse, chemotaxis, muscle contraction, and morphogenesis.
Numerical solutions of initial-value, eigenvalue and boundary-value problems for ordinary differential equations. Numerical solution of parabolic and hyperbolic partial differential equations.
Numerical solutions of initial-value, eigenvalue and boundary-value problems for ordinary differential equations. Numerical solution of parabolic and hyperbolic partial differential equations.
Numerical solutions of initial-value, eigenvalue and boundary-value problems for ordinary differential equations. Numerical solution of parabolic and hyperbolic partial differential equations.
Measure-theoretic foundations, abstract integration, independence, laws of large numbers, characteristic functions, central limit theorems. Weak convergence in metric spaces, Brownian motion, invariance principle. Conditional expectation. Topics selected from: martingales, Markov chains, ergodic theory.
Measure-theoretic foundations, abstract integration, independence, laws of large numbers, characteristic functions, central limit theorems. Weak convergence in metric spaces, Brownian motion, invariance principle. Conditional expectation. Topics selected from: martingales, Markov chains, ergodic theory.
Measure-theoretic foundations, abstract integration, independence, laws of large numbers, characteristic functions, central limit theorems. Weak convergence in metric spaces, Brownian motion, invariance principle. Conditional expectation. Topics selected from: martingales, Markov chains, ergodic theory.
Stochastic processes, Brownian motion, Stochastic integration, martingales, stochastic differential equations. Diffusions, connections with partial differential equations, mathematical finance.
Stochastic processes, Brownian motion, Stochastic integration, martingales, stochastic differential equations. Diffusions, connections with partial differential equations, mathematical finance.
Topics include: differentiable manifolds, vector fields, transversality, Sard's theorem, examples of differentiable manifolds; orientation, intersection theory, index of vector fields; differential forms, integration, Stokes' theorm, deRham cohomology; Morse functions, Morse lemma, index of critical points.
Riemannian metrics, connections, geodesics, Gauss lemma, convex neighborhoods, curvature tensor, Ricci and scalar curvature, connections and curvature on vector bundles. 
Jacobi fields, conjugate points, completeness, Hopf-Rinow theorem, Cartan-Hadamard theorem, energy, variation theorems and their applications, Rauch comparison theorem and its applications.
Introduction to modern combinatorics and its applications. Emphasis on enumerative aspects of combinatorial theory.
Algebraic and geometric aspects of combinatorics.  The use of structures such as groups, polytopes, rings, and simplicial complexes to solve combinatorial problems.
Affine varieties and radical ideals. Projective varieties. Abstract varieties. Morphisms and rational maps. Smoothness. Algebraic curves and the Riemann-Roch theorem. Special topics.
Complex varieties and the analytic topology. Sheaves and schemes. 
Problem-solving in graduate algebra: groups, rings, modules, matrices, tensor products, representations, Galois theory, ring extensions, commutative algebra and homological algebra. 
Problem-solving in graduate algebra: groups, rings, modules, matrices, tensor products, representations, Galois theory, ring extensions, commutative algebra and homological algebra.
Problem-solving in graduate algebra: groups, rings, modules, matrices, tensor products, representations, Galois theory, ring extensions, commutative algebra and homological algebra.
Group and rings. Sylow theorems, abelian groups, Jordan-Holder theorem. Rings, unique factorization. Algebras, and modules. Fields and vector spaces over fields. Field extensions. Commutative rings. Representation theory and its applications.
Group and rings. Sylow theorems, abelian groups, Jordan-Holder theorem. Rings, unique factorization. Algebras, and modules. Fields and vector spaces over fields. Field extensions. Commutative rings. Representation theory and its applications.
Group and rings. Sylow theorems, abelian groups, Jordan-Holder theorem. Rings, unique factorization. Algebras, and modules. Fields and vector spaces over fields. Field extensions. Commutative rings. Representation theory and its applications.
Numerical methods for infinite dimensional optimization problems.  Newton and Quasi-Newton methods, linear and sequential quadratic programming, barrier methods; large-scale optimization; theory of approximations; infinite and semi-infinite programming; applications to optimal control, stochastic optimization and distributed systems.
Combinatorial, integer, and mixed-integer linear optimization problems. Ideal and strong formulations, cutting planes, branch and cut, decomposition methods.
Lie groups and Lie algebras. Classification of semi-simple Lie groups. Classical and compact Lie groups. Representations of Lie groups and Lie algebras. Root systems, weights, Weil character formula. Kac-Moody and Virasoro algebras. Applications.
Lie groups and Lie algebras. Classification of semi-simple Lie groups. Classical and compact Lie groups. Representations of Lie groups and Lie algebras. Root systems, weights, Weil character formula. Kac-Moody and Virasoro algebras. Applications.
Mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics: the Hilbert space and Operator Algebra formulations; the Schrdinger and Heisenberg equations, symmetry in quantum mechanics, basics of spectral theory and perturbation theory. Applications to atoms and molecules. The Dirac equation.
Mathematical principles of statistical mechanics and quantum field theory. Topics include classical and quantum lattice systems, variational principles, spontaneous symmetry breaking and phase transitions, second quantization and Fock space, and fundamentals
Introduction to mathematical basic building blocks (wavelets, local Fourier basis, and their relatives) useful for diverse fields (signal and image processing, numerical analysis, and statistics). Emphasis on the connection between the continuum and the discrete worlds.
Special topics in various fields of pure and applied mathematics. Topics selected based on the mutual interests of students and faculty.
Specialist training in mathematics teaching.  Teaching, training, and cross observing classes taught using large group Socratic techniques, small group guided inquiry experiences, and/or other approaches to teaching at various grade levels. Required for advanced degrees in mathematics education.
Specialist training in mathematics teaching. Teaching, training, and cross observing classes taught using large group Socratic techniques, small group guided inquiry experiences, and/or other approaches to teaching at various grade levels. Required for advanced degrees in mathematics education.
Specialist training in mathematics teaching. Teaching, training, and cross observing classes taught using large group Socratic techniques, small group guided inquiry experiences, and/or other approaches to teaching at various grade levels. Required for advanced degrees in mathematics education.
Mathematics curriculum development for all grade levels. Required for advanced degrees in mathematics education.
Mathematics curriculum development for all grade levels. Required for advanced degrees in mathematics education.
Mathematics curriculum development for all grade levels. Required for advanced degrees in mathematics education.
An investigation of the interplay of mathematical pedagogy and mathematical content, including a historical survey of past and present methods in view of some of the influences that shaped their development.
An investigation of the interplay of mathematical pedagogy and mathematical content, including a historical survey of past and present methods in view of some of the influences that shaped their development.
An investigation of the interplay of mathematical pedagogy and mathematical content, including a historical survey of past and present methods in view of some of the influences that shaped their development.
Experience in methods of assisting and teaching of mathematics at the university level. Includes discussion of lecturing techniques, running discussion sessions, holding office hours, preparing and grading of examinations, student-teacher interaction, and related topics. Required of departmental teaching assistants. 

Hybrid course in Cellular & Molecular Biology for senior level (1) Biochemistry/Molecular Biology; (2) Genetics; or (3) Cell Biology majors. Face-to-face instruction combined with online lectures available at iBioseminars website delivered by leading researchers in Cellular & Molecular Biology.
Introduction to laboratory methods and procedures employed in studying molecular biology and biochemical processes. Lecture component for MCB 120L.
Introduction to laboratory methods and procedures employed in studying molecular biology and biochemical processes. Designed for students who need experience in use of molecular biology and biochemical techniques as research and analytical tools. 
Structure, expression, and regulation of eukaryotic genes. Chromosome structure and replication; gene structure, transcription, and RNA processing; protein synthesis and translation control; development, immune system, and oncogenes.  
Introduction to the principles of enzyme kinetics and receptor-ligand interactions with emphasis on metabolic regulation and data analysis. Topics include simultaneous equilibria, chemical and steady-state kinetics, allosteric enzymes, mulitreactant systems, enzyme assays, membrane transport and computer-assisted simulations and analyses.
An in-depth investigation into protein and nucleic acid structure and thermodynamics and how these properties influence their biological functions. Key examples of important functional classes of these molecules will be examined.
The biochemistry of important plant processes and metabolic pathways. Discussion of methods used to understand plant processes, including use of transgenic plants.
Discussion of the historical developments of modern biochemistry or current major research problems.
Discussion of the historical developments of modern biochemistry or current major research problems. 
Lectures illustrating the principles of cell biology with emphasis on light microscopy. Accompanies MCB 140L.
Exercises illustrating the principles of cell biology with emphasis on light microscopy.
Advanced cell biology with emphasis on molecular, biophysical and cellular properties of contractile and motile systems.
Physical chemical principles by which molecules form living, moving, reproducing cells.  Physical nature of cytoplasm; molecular structure/bonding in macromolecules, macromolecular assemblies and protein machines.  Physical techniques and modeling of cytoskeletal polymer-motor dynamics and function during intracellular transport, mitosis and motility.
The molecules and mechanisms that allow eukaryotic cells to coordinate cell growth, DNA replication, segregation of chromosomes and cell division.
Molecular basis of cell signaling, including positioning of cellular machinery, components of various signaling pathways, and downstream effects of signaling on cell adhesion, cell differentiation, and programmed cell death.
Student reports on current topics in cell biology with emphasis on integration of concepts, synthesis, and state-of-the-art research approaches. Reviews of literature and reports of undergraduate research may be included.
Analysis of the mechanistic basis for animal development with a focus on experimental evidence and the relevant fundamental experimental strategies. Fertilization and early development, morphogenesis and patterning, cell differentiation, regulation of cell proliferation and tissue growth.
Student reports on current topics in cell biology with emphasis on integration of concepts, synthesis, and state-of-the-art research approaches. Reviews of literature and reports of undergraduate research may be included.
Lecture instruction in the theoretical basis of laboratory techniques in transmission and molecular genetics, discussion of lab results and experiment interpretation.
Laboratory work in basic and molecular genetics including gene mapping, isolation and characterization of mutants in eukaryotic model systems, reverse genetics, gel electrophoresis, recombinant DNA techniques, and PCR. 
Human genome and genetic variation in human populations, molecular and genomic approaches in the practice of human genetics, epigenetic gene regulation, personal genetics and genomic medicine.
Current aspects of developmental genetics. Historical background and current genetic approaches to the study of development of higher animals.
Five basic operations of genetic analysis: mutation, segregation, recombination, complementation, and regulation. Emphasis on the theory and practice of isolating and analyzing mutations, as well as understanding mechanisms underlying both Mendelian and epigenetic inheritance. 
Discussion of current topics in molecular genetics to show advanced applications of basic principles and to highlight professional careeropportunities. 
Fundamentals of genomics, including structural genomics, functional genomics, proteomics, and bioinformatics,  focusing on the impact of these disciplines on research in the biological sciences. Social impacts of genomic research.
Presentation and discussion of current research by faculty and students.
Various topics in molecular and cellular biology including biochemistry, genetics, and cell biology will be discussed, along with ways undergraduates can participate in research projects of faculty members.
Technical and/or practical experience on and off campus, supervised by a member of the Section of Molecular and Cellular Biology faculty.
Research project carried out under the supervision of a faculty sponsor. Discussion and analysis of results and proposed experiments on a weekly basis with faculty sponsor. May include presentation of a seminar to a research group.
Continuation of an intensive, individual laboratory research project in biochemistry, genetics, or cell biology culminating with the presentation of the work in a written thesis and in a seminar.
Honors project. Continuation of an intensive, individual laboratory research project in biochemistry, genetics, or cell biology culminating with the presentation of the work in a written thesis and in a seminar.
Assisting the instructor in one of the section's regular courses by tutoring individual or small groups of students in a laboratory, in voluntary discussion groups, or other voluntary course activities.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.

Discussion of recent literature on the physical and chemical aspects of organization and function of living systems, topics of current interest in ultrastructure and function of cells. Organizational and functionalproperties of the molecular and cellular levels of biological systems.
Reports and discussion on embryology, morphogenesis, and developmental mechanisms.
Critical presentation and analysis of recent journal articles in developmental biology.
Research at a biotechnology company or interdisciplinary cross-college lab for a minimum of 3 months as part of the Designated Emphasis in Biotechnology Program.
Presentations and critical discussions of faculty and graduate student research in molecular and cellular biology including biochemistry, genetics, and cell biology.
Seminars presented by guest lecturers on subject of their own research activities.
Critical reading and evaluation of current literature in molecular and cellular biology disciplines. Papers presented and discussed in detail.

Practical experience in the methods and problems of teaching biochemistry/genetics/cell biology. Includes analysis of texts and
Overview of the anatomical, physiological and biochemical changes that occur during pregnancy and early development. Discussion and evaluation of nutritional/lifestyle factors associated with pregnancy outcomes and nutrition programs/interventions for pregnant women. 
Overview of the physiological and biochemical processes underlying human lactation and nutritional needs of both mother and infant. Development of skills in assessment, nutrition counseling, education and support of new mothers and their families.
Relationships among nutrition, growth, and development during childhood and adolescence. Nutritional assessment for normal and high risk groups; psychological, social, and economic factors contributing to nutritional status. Nutritional needs and interventions for special groups, including obese children/adolescents, athletes, and eating disordered. 
Application of epidemiological principles to the study of maternal and child nutrition. Topics include quantitative & qualitative study procedures, including study design, data collection, and related analytical techniques.
Current scientific literature related to Maternal & Child Nutrition in adult education settings. Topics include methods and theories of adult education and critical thinking skills related to research evaluation.
Current scientific literature related to Maternal & Child Nutrition. Topics include epidemiology, evidence-based practice, breastfeeding promotion, and nutritional assessment of populations.
Current scientific literature related to Maternal & Child Nutrition. Topics include nutrition surveillance and monitoring, as well as public policy development and implementation.
Techniques of cell culture, with emphases on cell physiology and the actions of drugs and toxicants on cultured somatic cells. Design, performance and interpretation of experiments with animal cells in vitro.
Advanced course on fundamental principles of cell physiology, transport physiology, signal transduction, physiology of excitable cells, and muscle physiology.
Advanced course in general principles of physiology, surveying homeostasis, cellular and selected topis, and neurophysiology.
Graduate level instruction in the general principles of physiology and the neural and humoral control of the cardiovascular, renal, respiratory, gastrointestinal, sensory, musculoskeletal, and reproductive systems. 
Integration of growth and development of skeletal muscle; morphology, biochemistry, neural control mechanisms, circulatory and nutritional factors. Prenatal and neonatal differentiation of fiber types. Experimental and hereditary myopathies.
Basic phenomena of sexual and asexual reproduction and comparisons of processes in a wide variety of animals; gamete formation, structure, and metabolism; fertilization; neuroendocrine mechanisms in maturation and reproductive cycles; behavioral aspects.
Emphasizes our current understanding of events in mammalian gametogenesis and the fertilization process. Published results, conclusions drawn from these results, and their contribution to our understanding are discussed.
Focus on timely topic of endrocrine research. Critical review of current literature and discussion of future research strategies in the area.
Neural-endocrine interactions; neural regulation of the endocrine system, especially in relation to reproduction; the role of hormones and growth factors in sexual differentiation of the brain.
General principles of neurotoxicology, the cell and molecular mechanisms and health impacts of specific neurotoxicants and the contribution of neurotoxic compounds to complex neurodevelopmental disorders and neurodegenerative diseases.
General aspects and basic mechanisms of biological rhythms; the importance of rhythm desynchronization in areas of pharmacology and space medicine; telemetry; mathematical methods; chronometry; daily, reproductive, and annual periods; shift-work, jet lag and sleep disorders. 
Definition of Stress; Physiological mechanisms of adaptation to stress; Hormonal control of the systemic stress response; Mechanisms of the cellular stress response; Discussion of current trends in stress physiology and current methods for studying the stress response;
Structure and function of the visual system, with emphasis on the eye and retina, including optics, anatomy, transduction, retinal synapses, adaptation, and parallel processing.
Functions of the central visual pathways and their underlying mechanisms. Recent research on aspects of anatomy, biochemistry, electrophysiology, psychophysics, development, and genetics of the visual system.
Causes and mechanistic bases of major blinding diseases. Recent research on aspects of anatomy, biochemistry, electrophysiology , psychophysics, development, and genetics of the visual system related to disease.
Designed for graduate and advanced undergraduate students, examines thermogenic systems in homeotherms (primarily mammals) with respect to regulation (hormonal and central nervous control) and effector mechanisms (basis of heat generation at the target cell).
 Presentation and discussion of faculty and graduate student research in physiology.
Review and evaluation of current literature and research in cellular adaptations to the environment. 
Seminars presented by guest lecturers describing their current research activities.
Participation as a teaching assistant for one quarter in a designated physiology course. Instruction in methods of leading discussion groups, leading laboratory sections, writing and grading quizzes, operation and use of laboratory equipment, and reading and grading laboratory reports. Meets teaching requirements for Ph.D. program in Physiology.
Participation as a teaching assistant for one quarter in a designated physiology course. Instruction in methods of leading discussion groups, leading laboratory sections, writing and grading quizzes, operation and use of laboratory equipment, and reading and grading laboratory reports. Meets teaching requirements for Ph.D. program in Physiology.
Practical experience in methods and problems of teaching physiology lecture courses. May include analyses of texts and supporting material, discussion of teaching techniques, preparing for and conducting discussion sessions, and formulation of topics and questions for examinations under supervision of instructor.
Participate in research projects relating to medicine with faculty in the School of Medicine.
Participate in projects related to curriculum development in support of curriculum for M.D. degree. Gain work experience and appreciationfor innovative approaches to learning in basic and clinical sciences of medical education. 
Two-week program provides students from diverse backgrounds an early introduction to learning skills that will facilitate success in medical school. 
Proficiency in computer applications relative to practice of medicine, with emphasis on email, literature searching, file transfer, and hospital information services. Given online, at home or in lab; time and place determined by student.
Medical students, nursing students and physician assistants students who are fluent Spanish speakers will learn a comprehensive set of medical vocabulary and cultural aspects related to the treatment of Spanish speaking patients.
Fluent Spanish-speakering medical students, nursing students and physician assistants students learn a comprehensive set of medical vocabulary and cultural aspects related to the treatment of Spanish speaking patients.
Basic and pathophysiologic processes involved in human reproductive and endocrine control systems, nutritional regulation, and foundational genetics across the lifespan. Integrate information across these systems and use clinical reasoning process to identify and understand relevant perturbations and diseases.
Small group training in patient communication, interviewing techniques, physical exam and clinical identification. Outpatient clinical experiences and didactic presentations also included.
Small case-based learning groups with training in patient communication and interviewing techniques clinical identification and problem solving applications of social psychological cultural bioethical and basic science concepts to patient case scenarios outpatient clinical experiences and didactic presentations.
Application of multidisciplinary basic, social and clinical science to clinical cases in small groups. History, physical examination with preceptors. Didactics in epidemiology, ethics, sexuality and clinical reasoning. Evaluation of professional competencies, attitudes and skills needed in the practice of medicine.
Introduces the fundamental concepts and tools of population health, evidence-based medicine, and system science.
Addresses the social, economic, cultural, policy-related, and environmental factors that affect the health of populations and individuals, and the role of health care systems (locally, regionally, nationally, and globally) in moderating the effects of these factors. Content builds on MDS 415A & MDS 415B, the TeamPEACE (Teamwork for Professionalism, Ethics, and Cultural Enrichment) curriculum in Doctoring 1, and students lived experience in UC Davis free clinics.
Capstone course integrates coursework, knowledge, skills and experiential learning to enable the student to demonstrate a broad mastery of learning across the curriculum.  
Application of multidisciplinary basic, social and clinical science to clinical cases in small groups. History, physical examination with preceptors. Didactics in epidemiology, ethics, sexuality and clinical reasoning. Evaluation of professional competencies, attitudes and skills needed in the practice of medicine.
Application of multidisciplinary basic, social & clinical science concepts to cases in small groups. History, physical examination with preceptors. Didactics in epidemiology, ethics, sexuality, and clinical reasoning. Evaluation of professional competencies, attitudes and skills needed in the practice of medicine.
Application of multidisciplinary basic, social and clinical science concepts to clinical cases in small group discussions facilitated by medical school faculty. Evaluation of professional competencies, attitudes and skills needed in the practice of clinical medicine.
MDS 421KA-C are a year-long series of courses. Objectives and assessments have been accelerated to accommodate the students enrolled in the ACEPC Program. Participate in all aspects of Doctoring 2, other than what was done in MDS 411KA & MDS 411KB.
MDS 421KA-C are a year-long series of courses. Objectives and assessments have been accelerated to accommodate the students enrolled in the ACEPC Program. Participate in all aspects of Doctoring 2, other than what was done in MDS 411KA & MDS 411KB.
MDS 421KA-C are a year-long series of courses. Objectives and assessments have been accelerated to accommodate the students enrolled in the ACEPC Program. Participate in all aspects of Doctoring 2, other than what was done in MDS 411KA & MDS 411KB.
Exposure to core content in bioethics and the law and introduce a framework for ethical decision-making, while emphasizing relationships between bioethics and clinical care.
Application of multidisciplinary basic, social and clinical science concepts to clinical cases in small group discussions facilitated by medical school faculty. Evaluation of professional competencies, attitudes and skills needed in the practice of clinical medicine. 
Application of multidisciplinary basic, social and clinical science concepts to clinical cases in small group discussions facilitated by medical school faculty. Evaluation of professional competencies, attitudes and skills needed in the practice of clinical medicine.
Application of multidisciplinary basic, social & clinical science concepts to clinical cases in small group discussions facilitated by medical school faculty. Evaluation of professional competencies, attitudes and skills needed in the practice of clinical medicine.
Application of multidisciplinary basic, social & clinical science concepts to clinical cases in small group discussions facilitated by medical school faculty. Evaluation of professional competencies, attitudes and skills needed in the practice of clinical medicine.
Application of multidisciplinary basic, social & clinical science concepts to clinical cases in small group discussions facilitated by medical school faculty. Evaluation of professional competencies, attitudes and skills needed in the practice of clinical medicine.
Longitudinal Clerkship will combine the Internal Medicine, OBGYN, Pediatrics, Psychiatry and Surgery Clerkships for the ACE-PC Program.
Longitudinal Clerkship will combine the Internal Medicine, OBGYN, Pediatrics, Psychiatry and Surgery Clerkships for the ACE-PC Program.
Longitudinal Clerkship will combine the Internal Medicine, OBGYN, Pediatrics, Psychiatry and Surgery Clerkships for the ACE-PC Program.
Instruction on teaching methodology and pedagogy. Mentored teaching of junior medical students in seminar, lecture, and bedside.
Fundamental knowledge of ophthalmology and otolaryngology for the treatment of eye, ear, nose and throat problems at a level of training of general physicians, including when to refer patients to a specialist.
Transition to Residency program addresses the graduating medical students need to improve clinical skills necessary for the first six months of residency and unmet graduation competencies in our competency-based curriculum.
Designed to assist medical student in transition from classroom to hospital setting.
Multidisciplinary preceptorship in a foreign country. Clinical credit will be awarded using this course, once approval has been received from the appropriate governing committee.
Multidisciplinary preceptorship in a foreign country. Used to award non-clinical credit for international experiences which have been approved by the appropriate governing committee.
Introduction to Dentistry and basic Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery. Offered by the Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery department at UC San Francisco.
Seminars on research presented by Medical School faculty; overview of pertinent issues, including medical ethics, human subjects protocols, case control methods, etc.
Exposure to various medical specialties, their residency programs and ways in which medical students can prepare for and improve their candidacy for such programs.
Practical aspects of a medical career.
Independent studies to accommodate modified curriculums, prepare for taking USMLE exams and for remediation course work directed by the Committee on Student Progress.
Learn and practice basic clinical skills in a supervised clinical setting. Skills include patient interviewing, history, physical examination, diagnostic and clinical reasoning, case presentation, and medical records documentation. Direct observation and individual feedback on clinical skills development is provided.
Independent studies to accommodate remediation for taking USMLE exams directed by the Committee on Student Progress. 
Longitudinal year-long course starting on July 1 and concluding at the end of Block 2. Focuses on immersing students in their respective communities to understand the strengths and challenges they face in relation to health.
Longitudinal year-long course starting on July 1 and concluding at the end of Block 2. Focuses on immersing students in their respective communities to understand the strengths and challenges they face in relation to health.
Longitudinal year-long course starting on July 1 and concluding at the end of Block 2. Focuses on immersing students in their respective communities to understand the strengths and challenges they face in relation to health.
Longitudinal year-long course starting on July 1 and concluding at the end of Block 2. Focuses on immersing students in their respective communities to understand the strengths and challenges they face in relation to health.
Student developed alternative to the SSM/SPO Requirement.  Approval by FYOC is required.
Through a series of lectures, seminars and clinical experiences, all occurring in other nations, students will research how health care systems address critical health issues. SSM Component.
Through a series of lectures, seminars and clinical experiences, all occurring in other nations, students will research how health care systems address critical health issues. Clinical Component.
Special Studies Module, a yearlong in progress court to teach lecture and discussion education technique and theory.
Working in interdisciplinary teams, will explore the theory and practical methods being employed to make improvement in health care systems while providing an opportunity for interprofessional educational experience.  
Working in interdisciplinary teams, will explore the theory and practical methods being employed to make improvement in health care systems while providing an opportunity for interprofessional educational experience.  
Working in interdisciplinary teams, will explore the theory and practical methods being employed to make improvement in health care systems while providing an opportunity for interprofessional educational experience.  
Inter-professional module is designed to explore the theory and practical methods being employed to improve patient safety in health care while providing an opportunity for interprofessional educational experience.
Generic course for awarding externship credit for medical student rotations that are not primarily focused on patient care.
Independent study: topics for selection include, but are not restricted to, medical ethics, economics and jurisprudence, culture and medicine, ethnicity and medicine, gender and medicine, history of medicine, health manpower, and medical education. A prepared paper on the selected topic will be required.
Develop a research project on a focused topic area, implements the research, writes a publishable paper, and presents an oral summary of the project.
Independent research project as part of the Medical Student Research Fellowship.
Introduction to the concepts and objectives underlying the preparationof financial statements. Topics include understanding the accounting cycle, measurement and valuation problems associated with financial statement components, consideration of the usefulness of financial statements in the analysis of a corporation's operations.
Information managers should know to be effective, including: product costing, motivating people, and differential analysis for decision making. Includes team projects and written and oral presentations.
Examines basic psychological and social psychological processes shaping human behavior and applies knowledge of these processes to the following organizational problems: motivation, job design, commitment, socialization, culture, individual and group decision making, and team building.
Strategic management of organizations, including analysis of industries, firm resources and capabilities and corporate strategy. Strategy formulation, implementation and strategic decision-making. Firm and industry life cycles and change. Analysis of organizational design and structure including differentiation and integration. 
Examines the interaction of consumers, firms and government, and the effect this interaction has on the use of resources and firm profitability. Fundamental economic concepts such as marginal analysis, opportunity cost, pricing, and externalities are introduced and applied.
Examines the influence of government and international factors on business. Topics include distribution of income, business cycles, inflation and interest rates, the federal debt, monetary policy and international trade and finance.
Introduction to statistics and data analysis for managerial decision making. Descriptive statistics, principles of data collection, sampling, quality control, statistical inference. Application of data analytic methods to problems in marketing, finance, accounting, production, operations, and public policy.
Practical statistical methods for managerial decision making covers regression analysis, time series analysis and forecasting, design and analysis of experiments in managerial research and contingency table analysis. Application of these methods to marketing, finance, accounting, production, operations, and public policy.
Analysis of market opportunities, elements of market research, development of marketing strategies, market planning and implementations, and control systems. Consumer and industrial markets, market segmentation, pricing strategies, distribution channels, promotion, and sales.
Corporate financial policy and investment management. Covers capital budgeting, optimal financial structure, cost-of-capital determination, risk measurement. Develops basic valuation principles for investments with long-lived and risky cash-flows, and extends these to derivative securities, asset portfolios, investment management and hedging.
Develops decision-making and problem-solving skills in conjunction with a quantitative model-building approach. Emphasizes how structured modeling techniques, probability forecasts, simulations, and computer optimization models are used in the overall process of making decisions in an uncertain environment.
Introduction to computer programming and data handling skills. Use of computer in organizations, emphasis on managerial aspects of computing. Standard and nonstandard uses of data files, centralization versus decentralization of computing, office automation, computer security.
Introduction to law and legal process in the United States. Sources of law. Structure and operation of courts, federal-state relationships, fundamentals of administrative law, fundamentals of business law.
Performance measures, budgetary controls and ethical pressures which occur at middle management levels in service-type operations. Addresses such organizations as engineering, medical groups, law offices, management consultants.
Principles and applications of social network theory: coordinating divergent interests to create value for individuals and organizations. Emphasis on conceptual models, web-based diagnostic tools, and practical applications.
Investigation of the bases of power in organizations and the tactics used to translate power into influence. Topics include the control of resources (including information), social psychological processes (including commitment), the construction of meaning, and ethics.
Strategic approach to the management of people within organization. Analyze employment systems' fit with firms' environments and strategies. Explore consequences of choices firms make in managing peopledecisions as to selection, performance evaluation, compensation, and other management policies and practices. 
Combines lectures, cases and homework to teach students tools and skills necessary to analyze pricing situations, make pricing decisions, and implement them, in a systematic manner. 
Equips students for a career in digital marketing and social media. Topics include online advertising, search engine optimization, interactive mktg, online privacy issues, e-commerce, social influence, social network theory, measurement of social influence, integrating social and traditional media. 
Examines the scope of missions, objectives strategies, policies, structures, measurements and incentives which bear on the management of an organization. Real client organizations, in the private and public sectors, are assigned to student teams as the subjects of study.
State-of-the-art concepts and methods to enhance the effectiveness of new product development activities. Focuses on the understanding of managerial issues and acquiring the ability to solve problems.
Customer Relationship Management (CRM) is a management approach under which marketing activities are organized and measured around customers (rather than around brands.) This approach is appealing because customers, not brands, are those who make buying decisions. 
Student teams develop complete business plans for their own start-up ventures. Process includes: elevator pitch, business strategy, comprehensive bottoms-up financial projections, capital requirements, product differentiation, competitive, alliance, and go-to-market strategy development, investor presentation, and comprehensive written business plan.   
Techniques for sharpening writing skills are introduced, along with grammatical structure, word choice, and punctuation. Learn to develop styles that are pitch-perfect for given situations and to think strategically about each communication challenge in a management setting.
Basic theory of negotiation; applies theory to process of building teams to achieve business purposes. Covers integrative and distributive strategies of claiming value, how to recognize bargaining tricks, uncovering hidden agendas, brainstorming to extend Pareto frontier.
Examines process by which organizations develop strategic marketing plans. Includes definition of activities and products, marketing audits, appraising market opportunities, design of new activities and products, and organizing marketing planning function. Applications to problems in private and public sector marketing.
Addresses the managerial issues and problems of systematically gathering and analyzing information for making private and public marketing decisions. Covers the cost and value of information, research design, information collection, measuring instruments, data analysis, and marketing research applications.
Why is software typically so defective? Why do many firms in the IT industry give away their best products free? Helps analyze questions like these by modeling competition and strategy in the network, technology and information industries.
Managing innovative enterprise in changing and uncertain environments. Covers technology forecasting and assessment, program selection and control, financial management, regulation, and ethics.
Explores the management of operations as applied to manufacturing as well as services provided both inside and outside the organization. Develop an understanding of how uncertainty affects planning and delivery by looking at fundamental models of operations.
Focuses on the market for corporate acquisitions and restructuring activity. Topics include: sources of value creation; takeovers; anti-takeover provisions; bidding strategies; use of leverage in buyouts; regulatory risk and hurdles; and, valuation approaches for highly leveraged transactions.
Analyzes the role of financial markets and institutions in allocating capital. Focuses on: bank lending; debt securities; financial market innovations; regulation; functions of commercial banks and other financial intermediaries. Utilizes case studies.  
Focuses on planning, acquiring, and managing a company's financial resources. Includes discussion of financial aspects of mergers and other forms of reorganization; analysis of investment, financial, and dividend policy; and theories of optimal capital structure.
Examines asset pricing theories and relevant evidence, including the investment performance of stocks and bonds. Topics include the efficiency of markets, domestic and international portfolio diversification, factors influencing the value of stocks and other investments, and portfolio management and performance.
Behavior of options, futures, and other derivative securities markets and how public agencies, business and others use those markets. Trading strategies involving options, swaps, and financial futures contracts. Pricing of derivative securities, primarily by arbitrage methods.
Examines venture capital finance and the related practice of R&D finance. Goal is to apply finance tools and framework to the world of venture capital and financing of projects in high-growth industries.
Studies fixed and floating exchange-rate systems. Topics include determinants of a nation's balance of international payments; macroeconomic interdependence of nations under various exchange-rate regimes and its implications for domestic stabilization policies; and the international coordination of monetary and stabilization policies.
Theory and practice of managing teams with primary goals of: providing conceptual guidelines for analyzing and diagnosing group dynamics and determining strategic options as a manager; imparting interpersonal skills for implementing effective strategies; understanding how technological change affects team processes.
Descriptive and Predictive Data mining methods covering association rules, clustering, classification, text mining, etc. Big data Technologies. Business applications. Hands-on data mining skills. Business intelligence for managerial decision making.
Analyzes and evaluates contemporary issues in financial reporting and develops implications of those issues for business decision makers, investment managers, and accounting policymakers.
Theoretical frameworks and associated techniques for using organizational design and cost management to achieve a sustainable, profitable cost structure. Topics include: target costing, process design for low cost, total cost of ownership, cost of customers, implementing structural change, and incentives.
Studies how investors, creditors, others use accounting and other information in making rational investment, lending decisions. Emphasis is placed on the analysis of financial information in a variety of contexts. Where applicable, recent research in finance and economics is discussed.
Discusses how corporations can better operate in the interests of shareholders and public. Directly relevant to managers, consultants in compensation and incentives, staff working on mergers and acquisitions, corporate regulators, shareholder rights activists, and board members.
Focus on single family, attached, detached, multi-family, and light commercial development. Students will study factors which make up successful real estate developments. Considers financial aspects involved in land acquisition, land development, construction, and project lending.
Matching supply with demand is a primary challenge for a firm: excess supply is too costly, inadequate supply irritates customers. Matching supply to demand is easiest when a firm has a flexible supply process, but flexibility is generally expensive.
Considers application of time series methods to evaluation and forecasting problems. Covers univariate and multivariate ARIMA models and transfer function models. Applications will be in such areas as economics, finance, budgeting, program evaluation, and industrial process control.
Communication system components; common carrier services; design and control of communications networks; network management and distributed environment; local area networks; data security in computer networks.
Advanced topics in general management. Varied topics to cover more extensively issues discussed in MGB 201A and MGB 201B, or current business interest topics in fields of business writing, business communications, development, or workplace processes.
Advanced topics in social psychology and sociology of organizations. Varied topics to cover more extensively issues discussed in MGB 201A and MGB 201B, or current business interest topics in fields of organization design, strategy, development, or workplace processes.
Contemporary and emerging issues in finance. Application of modern techniques of finance to business problems. Use of appropriate electronic database and research techniques.
Advanced topics in marketing, which may include marketing research, new product development, brand management, pricing, distribution management, service marketing, hitech marketing, advertising, sales promotions, marketing through the Web.
Contemporary and emerging issues in financial management accounting. Application of modern techniques of evaluation and analysis of financial information. Use of appropriate electronic database and research techniques.
Applications of information technology to management and management of information technology. Adaptation to the dynamic nature of the field.
Cyclical nature of innovation and technological change, features of innovative firms and industries, national innovation systems, and impact of information technologies on innovation processes.
Broader environment in which U.S. firms and their foreign competitors operate. Integration of material from other topics courses (marketing, strategy, finance, accounting, information technology, technology management) into the international setting.


Applies techniques and concepts in business statistics to real case studies.
Examines top down management of multi-asset class portfolios. Topics include bonds, hedge funds, private equity, real estate, commodities, endowments, return generation, performance analysis, credit cycles, financial crises, manager selection, investment policy, and investment careers. Student teams present endowment portfolio recommendations.
Focuses on the finance principles related to the risk and return of the private equity (PE) industry, valuation of PE target companies, the structuring of leveraged buyouts (LBOs), and the management of portfolio companies.
Covers advanced optimization modeling techniques and practical application of modern, scalable modeling language. Techniques will be developed using examples from production planning in a supply chain, but students may explore other areas of application of optimization for their final project.
Investor psychology and market frictions can cause asset prices to deviate from fundamental values, creating profit opportunities for sophisticated investors. Covers techniques of financial analysis with the goal of learning how to value assets and identify mispricing.
Provides solid grounding in the management of work and the employment relationship. Examines firms interrelated policies and practices for managing people.
Enhance understanding of the principles and concepts learned in Pricing by (1) teaching the necessary statistical and mathematical skills, and (2) requiring a report for a real Pricing case.
Applies classroom learning to solve complex business challenges for real world clients. Student teams learnpractical consulting skills while their clients benefit from the students experience, insights, and work product.  
Applies classroom learning to solve complex business challenges for real world clients. Student teams learn practical consulting skills while their clients benefit from the students experience, insights, and work product.
Applies classroom learning to solve complex business challenges for real world clients. Student teams learn practical consulting skills while their clients benefit from the students experience, insights, and work product.
Provides experience applying concepts learned in Marketing Communications to a realistic advertising or communication problem faced by firms.
Hands-on training in applying Customer Relationship Management concepts and metrics to secondary data. Enhances ability to interpret results and decide the right type of marketing actions by requiring an executive report at the end of the quarter.
Provides opportunities to apply the concepts covered in the Marketing Strategies class through a group project involving the analysis of strategic marketing decisions based on business-related issues, simulation and modeling.
Provides opportunities to apply the concepts and methods covered in the Marketing Research class. Hands-on and project-based, work could be either individual or in groups depending on enrollments and/or interests of students.
In-depth practicum project course. Apply theories, concepts, and models, learned in MGB 250 to a real-world business problem, through data collection, data analysis, simulation, modeling and post-model interpretation.
Work in groups to select and value a financial entity. It could be a firm, a sports player, a building, a project, or a patent. Grade based on an in-class presentation and a write-up.
Provides practical experience applying concepts learned in Investment Analysis to a realistic portfolio management setting via a hypothetical exercise. Produce a realistic executive summary and presentation of an investment proposal for a hypothetical client.
Practical application project drawing from the tax planning theory contained in MGB 264. Project consists of a business formation and operation, change in organization (incorporation), and movement into multi-national and multi-jurisdictional tax.
Provides an opportunity to apply concepts learned in Venture Capital in a realistic setting. Complete project analyzing a potential investment in a hypothetical venture and prepare an deal term sheet/investment agreement.
Groups investigate the performance, creativity, conflict, information sharing, and leadership behaviors of a real world team. Provide consulting advice to the team, which not only gives analytic skills, but also builds presentation skills. 
Projects applying concepts learned in Business Intelligence Technologies to real business problems.
Provides experience applying concepts learned in Supply Chain Management to a realistic management setting via a project.
Provides opportunity for students to gain experience in applying business methodologies previously acquired in other GSM courses.
Provides the opportunity for students to gain experience in applying business methodologies previously acquired in other GSM courses.
Provides the opportunity for students to gain experience in applying business methodologies previously acquired in other Graduate School of Management courses.
Introduction to the concepts and objectives underlying the preparationof financial statements. Topics include understanding the accounting cycle, measurement and valuation problems associated with financial statement components, consideration of the usefulness of financial statements in the analysis of a corporation's operations.
Information managers should know to be effective, including: product costing, motivating people, and differential analysis for decision making. Includes team projects and written and oral presentations.
Examines basic psychological and social psychological processes shaping human behavior and applies knowledge of these processes to the following organizational problems: motivation, job design, commitment, socialization, culture, individual and group decision making, and team building.
Strategic management of organizations, including analysis of industries, firm resources and capabilities and corporate strategy. Strategy formulation, implementation and strategic decision-making. Firm and industry life cycles and change. Analysis of organizational design and structure including differentiation and integration. 
Examines the interaction of consumers, firms and government, and the effect this interaction has on the use of resources and firm profitability. Fundamental economic concepts such as marginal analysis, opportunity cost, pricing, and externalities are introduced and applied.
Examines the influence of government and international factors on business. Topics include distribution of income, business cycles, inflation and interest rates, the federal debt, monetary policy and international trade and finance.
Introduction to statistics and data analysis for managerial decision making. Descriptive statistics, principles of data collection, sampling, quality control, statistical inference. Application of data analytic methods to problems in marketing, finance, accounting, production, operations, and public policy.
Practical statistical methods for managerial decision making covers regression analysis, time series analysis and forecasting, design and analysis of experiments in managerial research and contingency table analysis. Application of these methods to marketing, finance, accounting, production, operations, and public policy.
Analysis of market opportunities, elements of market research, development of marketing strategies, market planning and implementations, and control systems. Consumer and industrial markets, market segmentation, pricing strategies, distribution channels, promotion, and sales.
Corporate financial policy and investment management. Covers capital budgeting, optimal financial structure, cost-of-capital determination, risk measurement. Develops basic valuation principles for investments with long-lived and risky cash-flows, and extends these to derivative securities, asset portfolios, investment management and hedging.
Develops decision-making and problem-solving skills in conjunction with a quantitative model-building approach. Emphasizes how structured modeling techniques, probability forecasts, simulations, and computer optimization models are used in the overall process of making decisions in an uncertain environment.
Introduction to computer programming and data handling skills. Use of computer in organizations, emphasis on managerial aspects of computing. Standard and nonstandard uses of data files, centralization versus decentralization of computing, office automation, computer security.
Introduction to law and legal process in the United States. Sources of law. Structure and operation of courts, federal-state relationships, fundamentals of administrative law, fundamentals of business law.
Performance measures, budgetary controls and ethical pressures which occur at middle management levels in service-type operations. Addresses such organizations as engineering, medical groups, law offices, management consultants.
Principles and applications of social network theory: coordinating divergent interests to create value for individuals and organizations. Emphasis on conceptual models, web-based diagnostic tools, and practical applications.
Investigation of the bases of power in organizations and the tactics used to translate power into influence. Topics include the control of resources (including information), social psychological processes (including commitment), the construction of meaning, and ethics.
Strategic approach to the management of people within organization. Analyze employment systems' fit with firms' environments and strategies. Explore consequences of choices firms make in managing peopledecisions as to selection, performance evaluation, compensation, and other management policies and practices. 
Combines lectures, cases and homework to teach students tools and skills necessary to analyze pricing situations, make pricing decisions, and implement them, in a systematic manner. 
Equips students for a career in digital marketing and social media. Topics include online advertising, search engine optimization, interactive mktg, online privacy issues, e-commerce, social influence, social network theory, measurement of social influence, integrating social and traditional media.
Examines the scope of missions, objectives strategies, policies, structures, measurements and incentives which bear on the management of an organization. Real client organizations, in the private and public sectors, are assigned to student teams as the subjects of study.
State-of-the-art concepts and methods to enhance the effectiveness of new product development activities. Focuses on the understanding of managerial issues and acquiring the ability to solve problems.
Customer Relationship Management (CRM) is a management approach under which marketing activities are organized and measured around customers (rather than around brands.) This approach is appealing because customers, not brands, are those who make buying decisions. 
Student teams develop complete business plans for their own start-up ventures. Process includes: elevator pitch, business strategy, comprehensive bottoms-up financial projections, capital requirements, product differentiation, competitive, alliance, and go-to-market strategy development, investor presentation, and comprehensive written business plan.   
Techniques for sharpening writing skills are introduced, along with grammatical structure, word choice, and punctuation. Learn to develop styles that are pitch-perfect for given situations and to think strategically about each communication challenge in a management setting.
Basic theory of negotiation; applies theory to process of building teams to achieve business purposes. Covers integrative and distributive strategies of claiming value, how to recognize bargaining tricks, uncovering hidden agendas, brainstorming to extend Pareto frontier.
Examines process by which organizations develop strategic marketing plans. Includes definition of activities and products, marketing audits, appraising market opportunities, design of new activities and products, and organizing marketing planning function. Applications to problems in private and public sector marketing.
Addresses the managerial issues and problems of systematically gathering and analyzing information for making private and public marketing decisions. Covers the cost and value of information, research design, information collection, measuring instruments, data analysis, and marketing research applications.
Why is software typically so defective? Why do many firms in the IT industry give away their best products free? Helps analyze questions like these by modeling competition and strategy in the network, technology and information industries.
Managing innovative enterprise in changing and uncertain environments. Covers technology forecasting and assessment, program selection and control, financial management, regulation, and ethics.
Explores the management of operations as applied to manufacturing as well as services provided both inside and outside the organization. Develop an understanding of how uncertainty affects planning and delivery by looking at fundamental models of operations.
Focuses on the market for corporate acquisitions and restructuring activity. Topics include: sources of value creation; takeovers; anti-takeover provisions; bidding strategies; use of leverage in buyouts; regulatory risk and hurdles; and, valuation approaches for highly leveraged transactions.
Analyzes the role of financial markets and institutions in allocating capital. Focuses on: bank lending; debt securities; financial market innovations; regulation; functions of commercial banks and other financial intermediaries. Utilizes case studies.  
Focuses on planning, acquiring, and managing a company's financial resources. Includes discussion of financial aspects of mergers and other forms of reorganization; analysis of investment, financial, and dividend policy; and theories of optimal capital structure.
Examines asset pricing theories and relevant evidence, including the investment performance of stocks and bonds. Topics include the efficiency of markets, domestic and international portfolio diversification, factors influencing the value of stocks and other investments, and portfolio management and performance.
Behavior of options, futures, and other derivative securities markets and how public agencies, business and others use those markets. Trading strategies involving options, swaps, and financial futures contracts. Pricing of derivative securities, primarily by arbitrage methods.
Examines venture capital finance and the related practice of R&D finance. Goal is to apply finance tools and framework to the world of venture capital and financing of projects in high-growth industries.
Studies fixed and floating exchange-rate systems. Topics include determinants of a nation's balance of international payments; macroeconomic interdependence of nations under various exchange-rate regimes and its implications for domestic stabilization policies; and the international coordination of monetary and stabilization policies.
Theory and practice of managing teams with primary goals of: providing conceptual guidelines for analyzing and diagnosing group dynamics and determining strategic options as a manager; imparting interpersonal skills for implementing effective strategies; understanding how technological change affects team processes.
Descriptive and Predictive Data mining methods covering association rules, clustering, classification, text mining, etc. Big data Technologies. Business applications. Hands-on data mining skills. Business intelligence for managerial decision making.
Analyzes and evaluates contemporary issues in financial reporting and develops implications of those issues for business decision makers, investment managers, and accounting policymakers.
Theoretical frameworks and associated techniques for using organizational design and cost management to achieve a sustainable, profitable cost structure. Topics include: target costing, process design for low cost, total cost of ownership, cost of customers, implementing structural change, and incentives.
Studies how investors, creditors, others use accounting and other information in making rational investment, lending decisions. Emphasis is placed on the analysis of financial information in a variety of contexts. Where applicable, recent research in finance and economics is discussed.
Discusses how corporations can better operate in the interests of shareholders and public.  Directly relevant to managers, consultants in compensation and incentives, staff working on mergers and acquisitions, corporate regulators, shareholders rights activists, and board members. 
Focus on single family, attached, detached, multi-family, and light commercial development. Students will study factors which make up successful real estate developments. Considers financial aspects involved in land acquisition, land development, construction, and project lending.
Matching supply with demand is a primary challenge for a firm: excess supply is too costly, inadequate supply irritates customers. Matching supply to demand is easiest when a firm has a flexible supply process, but flexibility is generally expensive.
Considers application of time series methods to evaluation and forecasting problems. Covers univariate and multivariate ARIMA models and transfer function models. Applications will be in such areas as economics, finance, budgeting, program evaluation, and industrial process control.
Communication system components; common carrier services; design and control of communications networks; network management and distributed environment; local area networks; data security in computer networks.
Advanced topics in general management. Varied topics to cover more extensively issues discussed in MGT 201A and MGT 201B, or current business interest topics in fields of business writing, business communications, development, or workplace processes.
Advanced topics in social psychology and sociology of organizations. Varied topics to cover more extensively issues discussed in MGP 201A and MGP 201B, or current business interest topics in fields of organization design, strategy, development, or workplace processes.
Contemporary and emerging issues in finance. Application of modern techniques of finance to business problems. Use of appropriate electronic database and research techniques.
Advanced topics in marketing, which may include marketing research, new product development, brand management, pricing, distribution management, service marketing, hitech marketing, advertising, sales promotions, marketing through the Web. 
Contemporary and emerging issues in financial management accounting. Application of modern techniques of evaluation and analysis of financial information. Use of appropriate electronic database and research techniques.
Applications of information technology to management and management of information technology. Adaptation to the dynamic nature of the field.
Cyclical nature of innovation and technological change, features of innovative firms and industries, national innovation systems, and impact of information technologies on innovation processes.
Broader environment in which U.S. firms and their foreign competitors operate. Integration of material from other topics courses (marketing, strategy, finance, accounting, information technology, technology management) into the international setting.
 

Applies techniques and concepts in business statistics to real case studies.
Examines top down management of multi-asset class portfolios. Topics include bonds, hedge funds, private equity, real estate, commodities, endowments, return generation, performance analysis, credit cycles, financial crises, manager selection, investment policy, and investment careers. Student teams present endowment portfolio recommendations.
Focuses on the finance principles related to the risk and return of the private equity (PE) industry, valuation of PE target companies, the structuring of leveraged buyouts (LBOs), and the management of portfolio companies.
Covers advanced optimization modeling techniques and practical application of modern, scalable modeling language. Techniques will be developed using examples from production planning in a supply chain, but students may explore other areas of application of optimization for their final project.
Investor psychology and market frictions can cause asset prices to deviate from fundamental values, creating profit opportunities for sophisticated investors. Covers techniques of financial analysis with the goal of learning how to value assets and identify mispricing.
Provides solid grounding in the management of work and the employment relationship. Examines firms interrelated policies and practices for managing people.
Enhance understanding of the principles and concepts learned in Pricing by (1) teaching the necessary statistical and mathematical skills, and (2) requiring a report for a real Pricing case.
Applies classroom learning to solve complex business challenges for real world clients. Student teams learnpractical consulting skills while their clients benefit from the students experience, insights, and work product.  
Applies classroom learning to solve complex business challenges for real world clients. Student teams learn practical consulting skills while their clients benefit from the students experience, insights, and work product.
Applies classroom learning to solve complex business challenges for real world clients. Student teams learn practical consulting skills while their clients benefit from the students experience, insights, and work product.
Provides experience applying concepts learned in Marketing Communications to a realistic advertising or communication problem faced by firms.
Hands-on training in applying Customer Relationship Management concepts and metrics to secondary data. Enhances ability to interpret results and decide the right type of marketing actions by requiring an executive report at the end of the quarter.
Provides opportunities to apply the concepts covered in the Marketing Strategies class through a group project involving the analysis of strategic marketing decisions based on business-related issues, simulation and modeling.
Provides opportunities to apply the concepts and methods covered in the Marketing Research class. Hands-on and project-based, work could be either individual or in groups depending on enrollments and/or interests of students.  
In-depth practicum project course. Apply theories, concepts, and models, learned in MGP 250 to a real-world business problem, through data collection, data analysis, simulation, modeling and post-model interpretation.
Work in groups to select and value a financial entity. It could be a firm, a sports player, a building, a project, or a patent. Grade based on an in-class presentation and a write-up.  
Provides practical experience applying concepts learned in Investment Analysis to a realistic portfolio management setting via a hypothetical exercise. Produce a realistic executive summary and presentation of an investment proposal for a hypothetical client.
Practical application project drawing from the tax planning theory contained in MGP 264. Project consists of a business formation and operation, change in organization (incorporation), and movement into multi-national and multi-jurisdictional tax.
Provides an opportunity to apply concepts learned in Venture Capital in a realistic setting. Complete project analyzing a potential investment in a hypothetical venture and prepare an deal term sheet/investment agreement.
Groups investigate the performance, creativity, conflict, information sharing, and leadership behaviors of a real world team. Provide consulting advice to the team, which not only gives analytic skills, but also builds presentation skills. 
Projects applying concepts learned in Business Intelligence Technologies to real business problems.
Provides experience applying concepts learned in Supply Chain Management to a realistic management setting via a project.
Provides opportunity for students to gain experience in applying business methodologies previously acquired in other GSM courses.
Provides the opportunity for students to gain experience in applying business methodologies previously acquired in other GSM courses.
Provides the opportunity for students to gain experience in applying business methodologies previously acquired in other Graduate School of Management courses.
Theory of product costing; Analyzing the role and impact of accounting information on decision making; planning and performance evaluation. 
Introduction to the concepts, methods, and uses of accounting and financial reporting.
Develops an understanding of the supply and demand of accounting information. Topics include the generation and processing of accounting information, the examination of accounting information by auditors, and the use of accounting information by capital markets and tax authorities. 
Develops an understanding of the supply and demand of accounting information. Topics include the generation and processing of accounting information, the examination of accounting information by auditors, and the use of accounting information by capital markets and tax authorities. 
Begin to develop expertise in the accounting for assets and introduce analysis of financial statements.
Continue to develop expertise in the preparation of financial statements by studying the accounting for liabilities and stockholders equity. Examines the accounting for contracts that can have significant effects on firms financial statements.
Finishes the Intermediate Financial Accounting series by examining in depth the accounting for contracts related to pensions and leases. Preparation of the statement of cash flows and footnote disclosures.
Concepts/methods used to structure and finance new business ventures. Topics include evaluating the net social (financial) benefit of new investment projects; raising venture capital; the role of the venture capitalist; and the choice of organizational structure in new ventures.
Covers the design of cost accounting systems, the preparation of financial budgets and forecasts, cost analysis, and the use of cost and other financial data to motivate and evaluate the performance of business units and managers.
Seminar in the theory and practice of advanced or emerging areas related to the practice of professional accountancy.  Specific topics will vary according to the interests of the instructor or students. 
Introduction to the concepts and objectives underlying the preparationof financial statements. Topics include understanding the accounting cycle, measurement and valuation problems associated with financial statement components,consideration of the usefulness of financial statements in the analysis of a corporation's operations.
Information managers should know to be effective, including: product costing, motivating people, and differential analysis for decision making. Includes team projects and written and oral presentations.
Examines basic psychological and social psychological processes shaping human behavior and applies knowledge of these processes to the following organizational problems: motivation, job design, commitment, socialization, culture, individual and group decision making, and team building.
Strategic management of organizations, including analysis of industries, firm resources and capabilities and corporate strategy. Strategy formulation, implementation and strategic decision-making. Firm and industry life cycles and change. Analysis of organizational design and structure including differentiation and integration. 
Examines the interaction of consumers, firms and government, and the effect this interaction has on the use of resources and firm profitability. Fundamental economic concepts such as marginal analysis, opportunity cost, pricing, and externalities are introduced and applied.
Examines the influence of government and international factors on business. Topics include distribution of income, business cycles, inflation and interest rates, the federal debt, monetary policy and international trade and finance.
Introduction to statistics and data analysis for managerial decision making. Descriptive statistics, principles of data collection, sampling, quality control, statistical inference. Application of data analytic methods to problems in marketing, finance, accounting, production, operations, and public policy.
Practical statistical methods for managerial decision making covers regression analysis, time series analysis and forecasting, design and analysis of experiments in managerial research and contingency table analysis. Application of these methods to marketing, finance, accounting, production, operations, and public policy.
Analysis of market opportunities, elements of market research, development of marketing strategies, market planning and implementations, and control systems. Consumer and industrial markets, market segmentation, pricing strategies, distribution channels, promotion, and sales.
Corporate financial policy and investment management. Covers capital budgeting, optimal financial structure, cost-of-capital determination, risk measurement. Develops basic valuation principles for investments with long-lived and risky cash-flows, and extends these to derivative securities, asset portfolios, investment management and hedging.
Develops decision-making and problem-solving skills in conjunction with a quantitative model-building approach. Emphasizes how structured modeling techniques, probability forecasts, simulations, and computer optimization models are used in the overall process of making decisions in an uncertain environment.
Introduction to computer programming and data handling skills. Use of computer in organizations, emphasis on managerial aspects of computing. Standard and nonstandard uses of data files, centralization versus decentralization of computing, office automation, computer security.
Introduction to law and legal process in the United States. Sources of law. Structure and operation of courts, federal-state relationships, fundamentals of administrative law, fundamentals of business law.
Performance measures, budgetary controls and ethical pressures which occur at middle management levels in service-type operations. Addresses such organizations as engineering, medical groups, law offices, management consultants.
Principles and applications of social network theory: coordinating divergent interests to create value for individuals and organizations. Emphasis on conceptual models, web-based diagnostic tools, and practical applications.
Investigation of the bases of power in organizations and the tactics used to translate power into influence. Topics include the control of resources (including information), social psychological processes (including commitment), the construction of meaning, and ethics.
Strategic approach to the management of people within organization. Analyze employment systems' fit with firms' environments and strategies. Explore consequences of choices firms make in managing peopledecisions as to selection, performance evaluation, compensation, and other management policies and practices. 
Combines lectures, cases and homework to teach students tools and skills necessary to analyze pricing situations, make pricing decisions, and implement them, in a systematic manner. 
Equips students for a career in digital marketing and social media. Topics include online advertising, search engine optimization, interactive mktg, online privacy issues, e-commerce, social influence, social network theory, measurement of social influence and integrating social and traditional media.
Examines the scope of missions, objectives strategies, policies, structures, measurements and incentives which bear on the management of an organization. Real client organizations, in the private and public sectors, are assigned to student teams as the subjects of study.
Applies classroom learning to solve complex business challenges for real world clients. Student teams learn practical consulting skills while their clients benefit from the students experience, insights, and work product.  
State-of-the-art concepts and methods to enhance the effectiveness of new product development activities. Focuses on the understanding of managerial issues and acquiring the ability to solve problems.
Customer Relationship Management (CRM) is a management approach under which marketing activities are organized and measured around customers (rather than around brands.) This approach is appealing because customers, not brands, are those who make buying decisions. 
Student teams develop complete business plans for their own start-up ventures. Process includes: elevator pitch, business strategy, comprehensive bottoms-up financial projections, capital requirements, product differentiation, competitive, alliance, and go-to-market strategy development, investor presentation, and comprehensive written business plan.   
Techniques for sharpening writing skills are introduced, along with  grammatical structure, word choice, and punctuation. Learn to develop styles that are pitch-perfect for given situations and to think strategically about each communication challenge in a management setting.
Basic theory of negotiation; applies theory to process of building teams to achieve business purposes. Covers integrative and distributive strategies of claiming value, how to recognize bargaining tricks, uncovering hidden agendas, brainstorming to extend Pareto frontier.
Examines process by which organizations develop strategic marketing plans. Includes definition of activities and products, marketing audits, appraising market opportunities, design of new activities and products, and organizing marketing planning function. Applications to problems in private and public sector marketing.
Addresses the managerial issues and problems of systematically gathering and analyzing information for making private and public marketing decisions. Covers the cost and value of information, research design, information collection, measuring instruments, data analysis, and marketing research applications.
Why is software typically so defective? Why do many firms in the IT industry give away their best products free? Helps analyze questions like these by modeling competition and strategy in the network, technology and information industries.
Managing innovative enterprise in changing and uncertain environments. Covers technology forecasting and assessment, program selection and control, financial management, regulation, and ethics.
Explores the management of operations as applied to manufacturing as well as services provided both inside and outside the organization. Develop an understanding of how uncertainty affects planning and delivery by looking at fundamental models of operations.
Focuses on the market for corporate acquisitions and restructuring activity. Topics include: sources of value creation; takeovers; anti-takeover provisions; bidding strategies; use of leverage in buyouts; regulatory risk and hurdles; and, valuation approaches for highly leveraged transactions.
Analyzes the role of financial markets and institutions in allocating capital. Focuses on: bank lending; debt securities; financial market innovations; regulation; functions of commercial banks and other financial intermediaries. Utilizes case studies.  
Focuses on planning, acquiring, and managing a company's financial resources. Includes discussion of financial aspects of mergers and other forms of reorganization; analysis of investment, financial, and dividend policy; and theories of optimal capital structure.
Examines asset pricing theories and relevant evidence, including the investment performance of stocks and bonds. Topics include the efficiency of markets, domestic and international portfolio diversification, factors influencing the value of stocks and other investments, and portfolio management and performance.
Behavior of options, futures, and other derivative securities markets and how public agencies, business and others use those markets. Trading strategies involving options, swaps, and financial futures contracts. Pricing of derivative securities, primarily by arbitrage methods.
Examines venture capital finance and the related practice of R&D finance. Goal is to apply finance tools and framework to the world of venture capital and financing of projects in high-growth industries.
Studies fixed and floating exchange-rate systems. Topics include determinants of a nation's balance of international payments; macroeconomic interdependence of nations under various exchange-rate regimes and its implications for domestic stabilization policies; and the international coordination of monetary and stabilization policies.
Theory and practice of managing teams with primary goals of: providing conceptual guidelines for analyzing and diagnosing group dynamics and determining strategic options as a manager; imparting interpersonal skills for implementing effective strategies; understanding how technological change affects team processes.
Descriptive and Predictive Data mining methods covering association rules, clustering, classification, text mining, etc. Big data Technologies. Business applications. Hands-on data mining skills. Business intelligence for managerial decision making.
Analyzes and evaluates contemporary issues in financial reporting and develops implications of those issues for business decision makers, investment managers, and accounting policymakers.
Theoretical frameworks and associated techniques for using organizational design and cost management to achieve a sustainable, profitable cost structure. Topics include: target costing, process design for low cost, total cost of ownership, cost of customers, implementing structural change, and incentives.
Studies how investors, creditors, others use accounting and other information in making rational investment, lending decisions. Emphasis is placed on the analysis of financial information in a variety of contexts. Where applicable, recent research in finance and economics is discussed.
Discusses how corporations can better operate in the interests of shareholders and public.  Directly relevant to managers, consultants in compensation and incentives, staff working on mergers and acquisitions, corporate regulators, shareholder rights activists, and board members.
Focus on single family, attached, detached, multi-family, and light commercial development. Students will study factors which make up successful real estate developments. Considers financial aspects involved in land acquisition, land development, construction, and project lending.
Matching supply with demand is a primary challenge for a firm: excess supply is too costly, inadequate supply irritates customers. Matching supply to demand is easiest when a firm has a flexible supply process, but flexibility is generally expensive.
Considers application of time series methods to evaluation and forecasting problems. Covers univariate and multivariate ARIMA models and transfer function models. Applications will be in such areas as economics, finance, budgeting, program evaluation, and industrial process control.
Communication system components; common carrier services; design and control of communications networks; network management and distributed environment; local area networks; data security in computer networks.
Advanced topics in general management. Varied topics to cover more extensively issues discussed in MGT 201A and MGT 201B, or current business interest topics in fields of business writing, business communications, development, or workplace processes.
Advanced topics in social psychology and sociology of organizations. Varied topics to cover more extensively issues discussed in MGT 201A and MGT 201B, or current business interest topics in fields of organization design, strategy, development, or workplace processes.
Contemporary and emerging issues in finance. Application of modern techniques of finance to business problems. Use of appropriate electronic database and research techniques.
Advanced topics in marketing, which may include marketing research, new product development, brand management, pricing, distribution management, service marketing, hitech marketing, advertising, sales promotions, marketing through the Web.
Contemporary and emerging issues in financial management accounting. Application of modern techniques of evaluation and analysis of financial information. Use of appropriate electronic database and research techniques.
Applications of information technology to management and management of information technology. Adaptation to the dynamic nature of the field.
Cyclical nature of innovation and technological change, features of innovative firms and industries, national innovation systems, and impact of information technologies on innovation processes.
Broader environment in which U.S. firms and their foreign competitors operate. Integration of material from other topics courses (marketing, strategy, finance, accounting, information technology, technology management) into the international setting.


Applies techniques and concepts in business statistics to real case studies.
Examines top down management of multi-asset class portfolios. Topics include bonds, hedge funds, private equity, real estate, commodities, endowments, return generation, performance analysis, credit cycles, financial crises, manager selection, investment policy, and investment careers. Student teams present endowment portfolio recommendations.
Focuses on the finance principles related to the risk and return of the private equity (PE) industry, valuation of PE target companies, the structuring of leveraged buyouts (LBOs), and the management of portfolio companies.
Covers advanced optimization modeling techniques and practical application of modern, scalable modeling language. Techniques will be developed using examples from production planning in a supply chain, but students may explore other areas of application of optimization for their final project.
Investor psychology and market frictions can cause asset prices to deviate from fundamental values, creating profit opportunities for sophisticated investors. Covers techniques of financial analysis with the goal of learning how to value assets and identify mispricing.
Provides solid grounding in the management of work and the employment relationship. Examines firms interrelated policies and practices for managing people.
Enhance understanding of the principles and concepts learned in Pricing by (1) teaching the necessary statistical and mathematical skills, and (2) requiring a report for a real Pricing case.
Applies classroom learning to solve complex business challenges for real world clients. Student teams learn practical consulting skills while their clients benefit from the students experience, insights, and work product.
Applies classroom learning to solve complex business challenges for real world clients. Student teams learn practical consulting skills while their clients benefit from the students experience, insights, and work product.
Applies classroom learning to solve complex business challenges for real world clients. Student teams learn practical consulting skills while their clients benefit from the students experience, insights, and work product.
Provides experience applying concepts learned in Marketing Communications to a realistic advertising or communication problem faced by firms.
Hands-on training in applying Customer Relationship Management concepts and metrics to secondary data. Enhances ability to interpret results and decide the right type of marketing actions by requiring an executive report at the end of the quarter.
Provides opportunities to apply the concepts covered in the Marketing Strategies class through a group project involving the analysis of strategic marketing decisions based on business-related issues, simulation and modeling.
Provides opportunities to apply the concepts and methods covered in the Marketing Research class. Hands-on and project-based, work could be either individual or in groups depending on enrollments and/or interests of students.  
In-depth practicum project course. Apply theories, concepts, and models, learned in MGT 250 to a real-world business problem, through data collection, data analysis, simulation, modeling and post-model interpretation.
Work in groups to select and value a financial entity. It could be a firm, a sports player, a building, a project, or a patent. Grade based on an in-class presentation and a write-up.
Provides practical experience applying concepts learned in Investment Analysis to a realistic portfolio management setting via a hypothetical exercise. Produce a realistic executive summary and presentation of an investment proposal for a hypothetical client.
Practical application project drawing from the tax planning theory contained in MGT 264. Project consists of a business formation and operation, change in organization (incorporation), and movement into multi-national and multi-jurisdictional tax.
Provides an opportunity to apply concepts learned in Venture Capital in a realistic setting. Complete project analyzing a potential investment in a hypothetical venture and prepare an deal term sheet/investment agreement.
Groups investigate the performance, creativity, conflict, information sharing, and leadership behaviors of a real world team. Provide consulting advice to the team, which not only gives analytic skills, but also builds presentation skills. 
Projects applying concepts learned in Business Intelligence Technologies to real business problems.
Provides experience applying concepts learned in Supply Chain Management to a realistic management setting via a project.
Provides opportunity for students to gain experience in applying business methodologies previously acquired in other GSM courses.
Provides the opportunity for students to gain experience in applying business methodologies previously acquired in other GSM courses.
Provides the opportunity for students to gain experience in applying business methodologies previously acquired in other Graduate School of Management courses.
Introduction and overview of computer-based clinical record systems. Topics include data modeling, health system standards and terminologies; security, privacy and confidentiality; workflow modeling; data visualization; legal; decision support; public health; and evidence-based practice.
Explores decision support systems for medical application. Topics include medical decision making, uncertainty, review of existing decision support systems, knowledge engineering, data mining, and knowledge based systems.
Critical thinking about basic concepts in computer security and privacy.  How the computer security and privacy impact health informatics, ranging from electronic health records to telemedicine to remote, virtual surgery.
Special topics in Data Acquisition.
Basic clinical knowledge for health informatics students. Human systems, disease states and conditions, treatments and prognosis.  
Objectives include understanding the informatics techniques for data capture, information management, and knowledge generation that a student will use throughout their career. 
Special topics in Biostatistics. Evaluation Methods and Statistics in Biomedical Informatics. Research design and analysis with special emphasis on Biomedical Informatics.
Create awareness of how modern computer graphics have led to VR-Sim-Rob applications, and how they are modifying the teaching of medicine and in some cases the diagnosis and treatment of patients.
Basics of computer programming essential to the study of informatics. Impacts on systems within healthcare, public health, nursing, research, and others.
Designed to provide an overview of various aspects of microbiology and microbial processes. Topics will include microbial genetics and genomics, microbial metabolism, signaling, and adaptations.
Analysis at the molecular level of the interactions of microbes with the environment, microbes with other microbes, and microbes in symbiotic and/or pathogenic associations with eukaryotic hosts. Topics discussed will vary. 
Presentation and critical discussion of staff research activities. Designed for advanced graduate students.
Directed reading and discussion on select topics. 
Discussion of faculty research focusing on the biochemistry, genetics, and cell biology of microorganisms, along with ways undergraduates can participate in research projects of faculty members.   
Primarily for lower division students.

Survey of microorganisms emphasizing their interactions with humans and diseases. Topics include microscopy, survey of various microbes, the immune system, food microbiology, microbial pathogens, and mechanisms of disease transmission. Designed for students requiring microbiology for professional schools. 
Essentials of microbial biology, emphasizing phylogeny, physiology, genetics, ecology, and pathogenesis. Interactions with other microbes, humans, and the biosphere. Uses of microbes in agriculture and biotechnology. May be taught abroad.
Introduction to principles and laboratory methods employed in working with microorganisms. Designed for students requiring microbiology for professional school admission. May be taught abroad.
Principles and laboratory methods employed in working with microorganisms. Designed for students continuing in microbiology, genetics, or biochemistry.
Survey of the major groups of microorganisms emphasizing diversity of energy metabolism, morphology, evolution, and natural history.
Classical enrichments for the isolation of metabolically diverse microbes; modern molecular methods for the identification of isolates; cultivation independent analysis of microbial communities from local environmental samples.
Biology of microorganisms that form commensal, mutualistic, and pathogenic relationships with human beings, emphasizing their phylogeny, physiology, genetics, and ecology. Effects on human nutrition, development and physiology. Mechanisms of pathogenesis, immune response evasion, antibiotic action, and antibiotic resistance.
Cloning and analysis of recombinant DNA, with emphasis on Escherichia coli host-vector systems. DNA-modifying enzymes; vectors and their use; manipulation and expression of insert DNA; polymerase chain reaction; and sequence annotation. Graduate students see MIC 215.
Project-based course focused on problem-solving strategies in biology and medicine. Testing hypotheses by translating real-world problems into an appropriate mathematical model and translating the results into real-world understanding. 
Interactions between non-pathogenic microorganisms and their environment, emphasizing physiological and metabolic characteristicsof various groups and their adaptation to and modification of specific habitats.
Fundamentals of bacterial growth and bacterial responses to environmental stresses. Topics will include carbon and nitrogen regulation, growth rate control, post-exponential growth, and motility and chemotaxis. 
Molecular genetics and comparative genomics of representative pathogenic bacteria. Roles of mobile genetic elements, lateral gene transfer, and genome rearrangements in pathogen evolution. Mutation, recombination, and complementation as tools for genetic analysis. Content includes close examination of primary research articles.
Physiology and genetics of bacteria.  Isolation and characterization of mutant strains.  Mapping of mutations by conjugation and transduction studies of control of enzyme synthesis by induction, repression, and catabolite repression.  
Integrated presentation of the nature of animal, bacterial, and plant viruses, including their structure, replication and genetics.
Survey of the genetics, cell biology and technologies in yeasts and related lower eukaryotes. Topics include diversity of yeasts; cell structure; metabolism; cell cycle; genetic approaches and genomics; gene expression; yeasts as models to study higher eukaryotes; and contemporary techniques.
Exploration of host-parasite interactions at multiple levels, with an emphasis on global health and medically important human parasites.
Exploration of the causes and treatments of cancer at multiple levels: molecular/cell biology, clinical manifestations, epidemiology and prevention. 
Presentation and critical discussion of staff research activities: designed for advanced undergraduate students.
Discussion of faculty research focusing on the biochemistry, genetics, and cell biology of microorganisms, along with ways undergraduates can participate in research projects of faculty members. 
Continuation of an individual microbiological research project culminating in writing of a senior thesis under a faculty director.
Assisting the instructor in one of the section's regular courses by tutoring individual or small groups of students in a laboratory, in voluntary discussion groups, or other voluntary course activities.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.

Intended for first-year graduate students in Microbiology and closely-related fields. Advanced topics in phylogeny, physiology and diversity of bacteria.
Application of recombinant DNA technology to modern problems in biology, biochemistry, and genetics, emphasizing molecular cloning strategies, choice of vectors, preparation of insert DNA, and selection procedures.
Project-based course focused on problem-solving strategies in biology. Emphasis on testing hypotheses by translating real-world problems into an appropriate mathematical model and translating the results into real-world understanding. 
Advanced integrated presentation of animal, bacterial, and plant viruses, including their structure, modes of regulation, expression and replication, and effects on host cells and organisms.
Physical basis of protein-nucleic acid interaction. Topics include nucleic acid recognition by proteins, thermodynamics of protein-nucleic acid stability, and kinetics of binding process for both non-specific and sequence-specific nucleic acid binding proteins. Emphasis on systems that represent paradigms in protein-nucleic acid interactions.
Biochemical and genetic aspects of genetic recombination in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Mechanisms of recombination and biochemical and genetic characteristics of recombination proteins. Proteins include DNA strand exchange, DNA helicases, and Holliday junction resolving proteins.
Review and discussion of current research and literature in DNA repair and recombination with presentations by individual students and invited speakers.
DNA damage checkpoints, homologous recombination, and meiotic recombination. An advanced treatment of the clinical and current literature to discuss emerging principles and current models in these research areas.
Presentation and critical discussion of staff research activities. Designed for advanced graduate students.
Current progress in microbiology and cellular and molecular biology.
Review and discussion of current research and literature in bacterial physiology and genetics, with presentations by individual students.


Group Study in Medical Microbiology and Immunology; primarily for lower division students. Directed reading and discussion on selected topics. 
Special study for lower division students.
Various aspects of pathogenic fungi, particularly affecting humans, will be discussed including epidemiology, pathogenesis and pathology, diagnosis and therapy.
Human immune system and mechanisms of immunity. Basic components and function of immune system. Molecular basis of immune response; basic cellular and molecular mechanisms. Interactions between cells of immune system producing immune responses; regulating molecules. 
Supervised work experience in medical microbiology and related fields.
Project in research related to immunology of medically important viruses. Development of a hypothesis-driven project, performance of experimental protocols and preparation of graphical representation of original data. Requires oral and written presentation of research results. 
Directed reading and discussion and/or laboratory investigation on selected topics.
Individual research.
Study of mechanisms involved in microbial interactions within a hostenvironment. The following principles are basic to understanding these interactions: host recognition, invasion, competition and growth, and host defense.
Topics will include diverse vertebrate and invertebrate models of human infectious diseases.
Compares the major vertebrate and invertebrate animal models that are used most commonly to study human infectious disease, including mouse, non-human primate, Caenorhabditis elegans, and drosophila.
Epidemiology, pathogenesis, diagnostic methods and current literature discussion of protozoa, helminths and arthropods of medical importance.
Recent insights into the microbial communities inhabiting mucosal surfaces, and will discuss how the composition of these communities contributes to normal development, metabolism, education of the immune system, and disease susceptibility. Offered in spring quarter; even years.
Directed reading and discussion and/or laboratory investigation on selected topics. Sections 1, 2, 4, 5 are S/U grading only.
Laboratory investigation contributing to the dissertation for a graduate degree.
Various aspects of pathogenic fungi, particularly affecting humans, will be discussed including epidemiology, pathogenesis and pathology, diagnosis and therapy.
Assist instructor by tutoring medical students in one of the departmental courses that is a component of the required curriculum of the School of Medicine.
Directed reading and discussion and/or laboratory investigation on selected topics.

Basic statistics in clinical, laboratory and population medicine: descriptive statistics; probability; binomial, Poisson, normal, t-, F-, and Chi-square distributions; sampling distributions; parameter estimation; hypothesis testing; elementary nonparametric methods, simple linear regression and correlation; life table construction and analysis.
Continuation of MPM 202. Analysis of variance in biomedical sciences; nonparametric methods; multiple regression; unconditional logistic regression; biomedical applications of statistical methods. Microcomputer applications in population medicine to reinforce principles that are taught in lecture. Required for students in the Preventive Veterinary Program Graduate Group (PVM) and the Masters of Public Health Program (MPH).
Basic epidemiologic concepts and approaches to epidemiologic research, with examples from veterinary and human medicine, including outbreak investigation, infectious disease epidemiology, properties of tests, and an introduction to epidemiologic study design and surveillance.
Builds on concepts presented in MPM 205. Concepts of epidemiologic study designclinical trials, observational cohort studies, case control studiesintroduced in MPM 205A are covered in more depth, using a problem-based format. Discussion of published epidemiologic studies.
Concepts and skills in effective scientific writing for publication in a peer-reviewed journal in animal health or biomedicine. Includes developing an argument, organizing and writing a manuscript, improving readability, and responding to peer review.
Basic and advanced level of conceptual and methodological foundations in infectious disease epidemiology necessary for veterinarians to develop and evaluate programs for detection, prevention, and control of infectious diseases in animal populations. 
Basic principles in science including numeracy, scale, energy, and time; the scientific method; good and bad science. Emphasis on science topics recently in the news.
Research and writing in the mathematical and physical sciences. Presentations by various science faculty members.
Research and writing in the mathematical and physical sciences. Presentations by various science faculty members.
Work experience on and off campus in all subject areas offered as part of the ME/SA Studies program. Internship supervised by a member of the ME/SA faculty.
Supervised internship on and off campus in the area of Middle East & South Asia Studies.

In-depth examination of the great cities of North Africa, the Middle East and South Asia as cultural and historical artifacts. Topics include: the concept of the Islamic city, processes of modernity, and representations that reinforce imagination, memory and personal identity.
Iranian cinema of the 20th century in the context of profound cultural and social changes in Iran especially since the Iranian Revolution. Productions by representative directors such as Kiarostami, Makhmalbaf, Bahram Beizaie are included. Knowledge of Persian not required.  
South Asian cinema of last 100 years in the context of cultural, social, and political changes. South Asian history, Independence, Partition, urban life, class, migration, postcolonial identity, diaspora, gender, sexuality, religion, sport, performance, etc
Introduction to the debates/discourses about women and Islam. Transformations in debates/discourses in colonial and postcolonial periods in the Middle East & South Asia. Comparative study of debates/discourses on family, work, law, sexuality, religion, comportment, human rights, feminist and religious movements.
Seminar in Iran & Persian topics specializing in region-specific Middle East & South Asia studies.
Seminar in India/South Asia topics specializing in region-specific Middle East & South Asia studies. 
Seminar in Arab Studies topics. 
Supervised internship on and off campus in the area of Middle East & South Asia Studies.
Independent study of a problem in Middle East/South Asian studies involving the writing of an honors thesis.


United States Army, its organization, customs, courtesies, and rank structure. Surveys personal development skills needed for effective leadership such as critical thinking, time management, and health and fitness. Familiarization with the Army ROTC program.
Military leadership fundamentals to include setting direction, problem-solving, presenting briefs, and using effective writing skills. Basic military tactics, orienteering and land navigation. Dimensions of leadership values, attributes, skills, and actions.
Basic military tactical theories and their application at the individual and squad level. Military tactical operations and basic military first aid.
Personal and organizational leadership skills introduced in leadership laboratory. Extensive supervised leadership experiences conducted in a military environment. Basic military skills necessary to function in a leadership role.
Continuation of development of leadership and military skills introduced in MSC 014A. Emphasis on the role of the individual, the basic organizational element of the Army, the squad. Supervisory controls reduced as students gain capabilities.
Development of skills required for promotion to junior non-commissioned officer level. Chain of command from company through individual levels. Interrelationship of squad and platoon organizations.
Application of the nine Principles of War to key battles in American and World history. Tactics on a strategic and operational level. Evaluation of leadership and decision-making processes of key leaders.
Leadership values, attributes and theories. Use of basic military skills such as land navigation and squad operations to enhance understanding of the Army.  Types of military briefings.  Practice in interpersonal skills.  Presentation of a briefing.
Leadership of tactical teams in complex operating environment. Self-assessment of leadership style. Basic military skills: terrain analysis, patrolling and operations orders. Dynamics of adaptive leadership in the context of military operations.
Develop and practice personal military leadership skills in extensive supervised leadership labs.  Cadets perform basic military skills, improve on troop leading procedures and lead subordinates in tactical situations.  Begin with drill and ceremony, land navigation and individual movement techniques. 
Development and practice of personal military leadership skills in extensive supervised leadership labs. Performance of basic military skills, improvement on troop-leading procedures, leadership of subordinates in tactical situations.
Develop and practice personal military leadership skills in extensive supervised leadership labs. Begin with drill and ceremony, land navigation and individual movement techniques. Cadets perform basic military skills, improve on troop leading procedures and lead subordinates in tactical situations.
Leadership and management in organizational context. Team dynamics, leadership styles, professional ethics, development of a leadership framework. Management skills for planning, decision making, and organizing developed through definition of problems, development of courses of action, implementation of solutions.
Military small unit tactical theory as the basis for leadership development.  Principles of war, contemporary operating environment, Geneva Law of Land Warfare, military offensive and defensive operations.  Emphasis on development of critical thinking, problem solving, and communication skills.
Military small unit tactical theory and application as basis for leadership development.  Application of leadership styles and skills to complete problem-solving exercises and the development of an adaptable framework applicable to a variety of shifting environments and situations.
Small unit tactical operations serve as the basis for enhancement of leadership performance through tactical application.  Assessment of leadership attributes, skills, and actions through participation in a variety of leadership roles in problem-solving exercises.
Small unit tactical operations as the basis for enhancement of leadership performance through tactical application.  Assessment of leadership attributes, skills, and actions through participation in a variety of leadership roles in problem-solving exercises.
Small unit tactical operations are taught, serve as basis for students exploration, development.  Serve in variety of leadership roles in which leadership attributes, skills, actions are closely assessed and developed while they are faced with series of problem solving exercises.
Direct influence of leaders on individual motivation and group processes. The complexities of balancing moral, legal, and ethical obligations while applying fundamental business principles in determining the best possible outcome from competing solutions.
The United States Constitution and the Military Justice System. Basic law of war, with an emphasis on issues that might arise on the battlefield or during a national emergency. 
Leadership and management, focusing on four management systems: planning, organizing, leading and controlling. Practical methodologies for assessing management decisions while balancing competing ethical, economic, infrastructure and future growth trade-offs.
Enhancement of student leadership performance through practical application.  Small unit military tactical operations as the basis for the student exploration and development.  
Enhancement of student leadership performance through practical application.  Small unit military tactical operations serve as the basis for student exploration and development.
Enhancement of student leadership performance through practical application.  Small unit military tactical operations as the basis for student exploration and development.
Intensive examination of one or more special problems in military science. Possible areas of study include leadership dimensions, principles of war, air-land battle imperatives, military strategy, the operational art and professional ethics.
Student facilitated course intended primarily for lower division students.
Medieval and/or Renaissance aspects of cross culturalism. Relations between Christians, Jews, and Muslims: Europeans, Africans, and Asians; Old World and New World.
Focus on a particular problem or issue in the Medieval or Early Modern periods. Seminar topics might include (but not limited to) monasticism, origins of the university, chivalry, exploration, the role of women in the Medieval and Early Modern world.
Preparation of a research paper dealing with a selected aspect ofmedieval culture, under supervision of three members of the Committee in Charge.
Tutoring in MST 020A & MST 020B, including leadership in small discussion groups affiliated with the course. 
Student facilitated course intended primarily for upper division students.
Under the supervision of a faculty member, an undergraduate student plans and develops the course they will offer under 098F/198F.
Student facilitated. Under the supervision of a faculty member, an undergraduate student teaches a course under 098F/198F.
Training to meet the minimum piano requirements for the major in music. Scales and simple harmonic progressions in twelve keys, both major and minor.
Training to meet the minimum piano requirements for the major in music. Harmonic progressions, modulations and score reading at the piano.
Training to meet the minimum piano requirements for the major in music. Harmonic progressions, figured bass realization, sight reading and keyboard repertory.
Continuation of MUS 003A. Development of melodic and harmonic writing skills. Basic analysis training. Intended for the general student.
Development of music writing and listening skills through the study of music fundamentals, species counterpoint, harmony, analysis of repertory. Intended primarily for music majors.
Continuation of MUS 006A.
Continuation of MUS 006A & MUS 006B.
Homophonic music of the Classical era with a focus on analysis of music by Haydn, Mozart, and Beethoven. Composition of pieces in the homophonic forms such as minuet and trio, theme and variations, rondo and sonata. Intended for music majors.
Harmony and voice of the 19th century leading through the music of the Romantic era. Focus on analysis of music by Chopin, Schumann, Brahms, Wagner, and Wolf. Composition of character pieces and songs. Intended for Music majors.
Music of the first thirty years of the 20th century and various analytical tools pertaining to it. Works of Debussy, Stravinsky, Schoenberg, Berg, and others. Composition of small pieces for solo instruments, voice and piano. Intended for music majors.
Melodic, rhythmic, and harmonic materials of Western music. Includes sight singing, explanations, drills, melodic/rhythmic/harmonic dictations, and listening analysis.
Melodic, rhythmic, and harmonic materials of Western music. Includes sight singing, explanations, drills, melodic/rhythmic/harmonic dictations, and listening analysis.
Melodic, rhythmic, and harmonic materials of Western music. Includes sight singing, explanations, drills, melodic/rhythmic/harmonic dictations, and listening analysis. 
Melodic, rhythmic, and harmonic materials of Western music. Includes sight singing, explanations, drills, melodic/rhythmic/harmonic dictations, and listening analysis. 
Melodic, rhythmic, and harmonic materials of Western music. Includes sight singing, explanations, drills, melodic/rhythmic/harmonic dictations, and listening analysis.
The melodic, rhythmic, and harmonic materials of Western music. Includes sight singing, explanations, drills, melodic/rhythmic/harmonic dictations, and listening analysis.
History of music from the late Baroque to Beethoven. Intended primarily for majors in music. 
History of music from the Romantic Period to the 19th century. Intended primarily for majors in Music.
History of music of the 20th century. Intended primarily for majors in music.
Directed group study.
Special study for undergraduates.
Music of the 20th century from 1930 through 1950 and the various analytical tools pertaining to it. Works of Copland, Sessions, Schoenberg, Bartk, and Stravinsky. Composition of small pieces for piano and voice.
Music from 1950 to the present and the analytical tools pertaining to it. Works of Babbit, Carter, Dallapiccola, Ligeti, Messiaen, Reich and others. Composition of small pieces for ensemble. 
Imitative tonal counterpoint with an analytical focus on the Two-Part Inventions and fugues from the The Well-Tempered Klavier by J. S. Bach. Composition of exercises and short pieces using contrapuntal techniques. Intended for music majors. 
Workshop in musical composition for undergraduates who are interested in pursuing serious compositional studies and intending to follow the composition track of the major. Explores the techniques and materials of musical composition.
Jazz and the evolution of jazz styles in historical and cultural context. For non-majors.
Jazz and the evolution of jazz styles in historical and cultural context. For non-majors.
Rock and the evolution of rock styles in historical and cultural context. For non-majors.
Basics of electronic music history, techniques, and composition. Fixed media creation using field recordings. Focus on history, theory and techniques of musique concrte, elektronische musik, and related repertoire. 
Hacking, bending, and creating electronic circuits to make sound. Learning to read circuit diagrams, to build prototypes, and to solder components together. Repertoire study. 
Techniques of orchestration from study of basic instrumental techniques to analysis of orchestral scores and scoring for various instrumental combinations.
Techniques of orchestration from study of basic instrumental techniques to analysis of orchestral scores and scoring for various instrumental combinations.
Work of Beethoven will be studied in the context of his time and his contemporaries. Lectures, discussion/guided listening sections, and selected readings. For non-majors.
Work of Beethoven will be studied in the context of his time and his contemporaries. Lectures, discussion/guided listening sections, and selected readings. For non-majors.
Work of Stravinsky will be studied in the context of his time and his contemporaries. Lectures, discussion/guided listening sections, and selected readings. For non-majors.
Work of Stravinsky will be studied in the context of his time and his contemporaries. Lectures, discussion/guided listening sections, and selected readings. For non-majors.
Work of Bach will be studied in the context of his time and his contemporaries. Lectures, discussion/guided listening sections, and selected readings. For non-majors.
Work of Bach will be studied in the context of his time and his contemporaries. Lectures, discussion/guided listening sections, and selected readings. For non-majors.
Work of Mozart will be studied in the context of his time and his contemporaries. Lectures, discussion/guided listening sections, and selected readings. For non-majors.
Work of Mozart will be studied in the context of his time and his contemporaries. Lectures, discussion/guided listening sections, and selected readings. For non-majors.
Work of Haydn in the context of his time and his contemporaries. Lectures, discussion/guided listening sections, and selected readings. For non-majors.
Work of Haydn in the context of his time and his contemporaries. Lectures, discussion/guided listening sections, and selected readings. For non-majors.
Overview of American concert music by master composers from Charles Ives to the present. Lectures, discussion/guided listening sections, and selected readings. For non-majors.
Overview of American concert music by master composers from Charles Ives to the present. Lectures, discussion/guided listening sections, and selected readings. For non-majors.
Work of Handel in the context of his time and his contemporaries. Lectures, discussion/guided listening sections, and selected readings. For non-majors.
Work of Handel in the context of his time and his contemporaries. Lectures, discussion/guided listening sections, and selected readings. For non-majors.
Fundamentals of Jazz music theory, ear training, harmony and composition techniques. Designed to complement participation in Jazz Combo or Jazz Band. First of a three-course sequence. 
Intermediate level Jazz music theory, ear training, harmony, and composition techniques including improvisation. Designed to complement participation in Jazz Combo or Jazz Band. Second of a three-course sequence.
Jazz compositions and arranging in different styles using techniques of Jazz theory, harmony and improvisation. Third of a three-course sequence.
Principles and techniques of conducting as they apply to both choral and instrumental ensembles.
Intermediate conducting with a continued focus on principles and techniques as they apply to both choral and instrumental ensembles.
Film music from silent films to movies of the past decade. How music supports and shapes film narrative and structure. Use of jazz, rock and classical music in film.
Sources and problems of a historical period or musical style selected by the instructor and announced in advance.
Analysis of works of a composer or musical style selected by the instructor and announced in advance. Consideration of theoretical issues.
Introduction to the study of music in cross-cultural perspective. Basic theories and frameworks of ethnomusicology; in-depth case studies of three musical traditions from around the world. Intended for music majors.
Historical survey of composers and musical styles from the Middle Ages to the beginning of the 17th century. 
Historical survey of composers and musical styles from the late 1500s to the mid-18th century.
Introductory survey of American musics, including Native American music, Hispanic polyphony, New England psalmody, and selected 20th-century composers and styles.
Introductory survey of American musics, including Native American music, Hispanic polyphony, New England psalmody, and selected 20th-century composers and styles.
Examination of music from Latin America. Characteristic music (i.e., tango, bossa nova, salsa, musica motena, musica andina) as well as its implications in other musical genres. Taught in English or Spanish depending on instructor. 
Examination of music from Latin America. Characteristic music (i.e. tango, bossa nova, salsa, musica motena, musica andina) as well as its implications in other musical genres. Taught abroad in Spanish or English depending on instructor. 
Survey of music cultures from North, Central, and South America, including the Caribbean, with emphasis on the role of music in society and on the elements of music (instruments, theory, genres and form, etc.). Introduction to ethnomusicological theory, methods, approaches.
Survey of music cultures from North, Central, and South America, including the Caribbean, with emphasis on the role of music in society and on the elements of music (instruments, theory, genres and form, etc.). Introduction to ethnomusicological theory, methods, approaches.
Survey of music cultures with special emphasis on the role of music in society and on the elements of music (instruments, theory, genres and form, etc.). Introduction to ethnomusicological theory, methods, approaches.
Survey of music cultures with special emphasis on the role of music in society and on the elements of music (instruments, theory, genres and form, etc.). Introduction to ethnomusicological theory, methods, approaches.
Survey of music cultures from Japan, China, Korea, Vietnam, and Indonesia, with special emphasis on the role of music in society and on the elements of music (instruments, theory, genres and form, etc.). Introduction to ethnomusicological theory, methods, approaches.
Survey of music cultures from Japan, China, Korea, Vietnam, and Indonesia, with special emphasis on the role of music in society and on the elements of music (instruments, theory, genres and form, etc.). Introduction to ethnomusicological theory, methods, approaches.
Survey of folk musics from all of Europe, with emphasis on the role of music in society and on the elements of music (instruments, genres, form, etc.). Introduction to ethnomusicological theory, methods, approaches.
Survey of folk musics from all of Europe, with emphasis on the role of music in society and on the elements of music (instruments, genres, form, etc.). Introduction to ethnomusicological theory, methods, approaches.
Class instruction, arranged by section; Voice. Offered as demand indicates.
Class instruction, arranged by section; Piano. Offered as demand indicates.
Class instruction, arranged by section; Harpsichord. Offered as demand indicates.
Class instruction, arranged by section; Organ. Offered as demand indicates.
Class instruction, arranged by section; Violin. Offered as demand indicates.
Class instruction, arranged by section; Viola. Offered as demand indicates.
Class instruction, arranged by section; Cello. Offered as demand indicates. 
Class instruction, arranged by section; Double Bass. Offered as demand indicates. 
Class instruction, arranged by section; Flute. Offered as demand indicates.
Class instruction, arranged by section; Oboe. Offered as demand indicates.
Class instruction, arranged by section; Clarinet. Offered as demand indicates.
Class instruction, arranged by section; Bassoon. Offered as demand indicates.
Class instruction, arranged by section; French Horn. Offered as demand indicates.
Class instruction, arranged by section; Trumpet. Offered as demand indicates.
Class instruction, arranged by section; Trombone. Offered as demand indicates.
Class instruction, arranged by section; Tuba. Offered as demand indicates.
Class instruction, arranged by section; Percussion. Offered as demand indicates.
Class instruction, arranged by section. Offered as demand indicates.
Individual instruction in voice.
Individual instruction in Piano.
Individual instruction in Harpsichord.
Individual instruction in Organ.
Individual instruction in Violin.
Individual instruction in Viola.
Individual instruction in Cello.
Individual instruction in Double Bass.
Individual instruction in Flute.
Individual instruction in Oboe.
Individual instruction in Clarinet.
Individual instruction in Bassoon.
Individual instruction in French Horn.
Individual instruction in Trumpet.
Individual instruction in Trombone.
Individual instruction in Tuba.
Individual instruction in Percussion.
Individual instruction in Classical Guitar.
Individual instruction in Saxophone.
Elements of basic singing techniques, through selected exercises, vocalises, and songs.
Open to students in any major. rehearsal, study, and performance of jazz band music and full variety of jazz band style, including swing, be-bob, and contemporary jazz styles.
Open to any student in the University whose proficiency meets the requirements of concert performance. Sight-reading, rehearsal and performance of music from the orchestral literature.
Rehearsal and performance of works for small choral group. 
Rehearsal and performance of music for band. 
Rehearsal and performance of choral music. 
Rehearsal and performance of Medieval, Renaissance, and Baroque music for vocal ensemble and historical instruments.
Open to any student in the University whose proficiency meets the requirements of concert performance. Study, rehearsal, and performance of ensemble music for strings, winds, voice, piano, harpsichord, and organ.
Rehearsal, study, and performance of a full variety of wind ensemble music; and to have students share their work in public performances.
Basics of Hindustani music through theory and practice. Fundamentals of raga (mode) and tala (rhythms) with special emphasis on improvisation, a central feature of khyal (singing style). Five ragas each quarter. 
Indonesian music practice. Basic instrumental technique and repertory.salendro and degung.
Practice of Brasilian music. Basic instrumental technique and repertory. Focus on the percussion traditions of Rio de Janeiro and Bahia.
Practice of Brazilian music. Basic instrumental technique and repertory. Focus on the percussion traditions of Rio de Janeiro and Bahia.
Practice of Korean percussion styles. Basic instrumental technique and repertory. Focus on the percussion traditions of samulnori and basic concepts of p'ungmul.
Performance of African derived folkloric music of Cuba. Basic instrumental technique and repertory. Focus on percussion and song traditions from Havana, Matazas and Santiago, Cuba.
Basic instrumental techniques, songs, and dance movements of Capoeira Angola. Protocols of a Capoeira Angola performance and the meanings of Capoeira in Brazil with its connections to Afro-Brazilian culture.
Study and rehearsal of percussion chamber music from the 20th and 21st centuries. Study of standard and extended techniques for a broad range of percussion instruments. Public performance of significant works for percussion ensemble.  
Internship outside the university related to music.
Preparation and presentation of a culminating project, under the supervision of an instructor, in one of the creative or scholarly areas of music.
Preparation and presentation of a culminating project, under the supervision of an instructor, in one of the creative or scholarly areas of music.
Preparation of a senior project in music composition (public presentation of a new work), in music performance (a public recital), or in music history and theory (public presentation of research results). 
Directed group study.
Special study for advanced undergraduates.
Technical aspects of conducting and the broader issues in music history and analysis that conductors must face before leading a rehearsal or performance. 
Advanced composition of computer and electronic music.
In-depth ethnomusicological studies of selected cultures and their musics; study of historical, theoretical, contextual, and cultural features. 
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Intensive focus on analysis of Native American literary texts, with frequent writing assignments to develop critical thinking and composition skills.


Second Level of the teaching of Quechua language and society.  Emphasis on development of conversational and reading skills.  Continuation of the study of aspects of contemporary Andean society and the status of Quechua language today.  
Third level of the teaching of Quechua language and society. Emphasis on development of conversational and reading skills. Introduction to more complex grammatical structures. Continuing the study of contemporary Andean society and the status of Quechua language today.
Fourth level of the teaching of Quechua language and society. Emphasis on complex structural patterns while emphasizing conversational skills and improving reading competence. Study of different sociopolitical processes that have affected Andean identity and the status of Quechua language.  
Important issues facing Native Americans in the contemporary world. Focus primarily on the diverse ways of life, histories and realities of indigenous people throughout the Americas as they develop their own cultural and political institutions.
Study of selected Native American Tribal Governments, confederations, leagues, and alliance systems.
Native American governmental and community decision making with emphasis on federal and state programs, tribal sovereignty, current political trends and funding for tribal services.
Examination of the various interest groups and movements found among Native people and how they relate to the determination of Indian affairs. Study of political action available to Native groups, and local communities, along with relevant theory relating to underdevelopment.
Social, political, cultural movements of indigenous South Americans in response to establishment, expansion of European colonialism, post-colonial nation-states. Ethnopolitical processes developed through interactions between Indians, Euroamericans. Socioethnographic analysis of main indigenous areas and the development of national societies. May be taught abroad.
Price of progress and modernity for native and non-native people. History of the corporation and neoliberalism, military and intelligence agencies, debt, Taylorism, education institutions, media, and law. Discussion of alternatives advocated by contemporary and indigenous social movements.
Application of community development theory and techniques to thedevelopment problems of Native American communities.
Interdisciplinary study of public expressive forms among Native Americans. Comparison and analysis of music, dances, rituals, and dramas from throughout North, Central, and South America in their social and cultural contexts. Extensive film viewing. 
Study of Native American ethno-history in North America before 1770s.
Study of Native American ethno-history in North America, 1770-1890.
Study of Native American ethno-history in North America after 1890.
Exploration of complexities of Native American racial, cultural and national identities and alliances. Study of tribal and federal citizenship, mixed descent and diasporic people(s), claims to resources, ethnic fraud and contemporary movements of cultural resurgence and political sovereignty and self-determination.
Historical and traditional Native American constructions of feminine, masculine, and non-binary genders with attention to culture- and place-based gender roles and statuses. Analysis of problems with contemporary terminologies and impacts of colonization on contemporary constructions of gender identities.
Introduction to basic research resources pertinent to Native American subjects available in the region, including libraries, archives, museums, etc. Emphasis on learning to use documentary resources or other collections of data. Students will carry out individual projects. 
Works of fiction (short story, novel) by contemporary Native American authors, with an emphasis on writers from the United States.
Works by or about Native Americans including non-fiction novels, biographies and autobiographies. Explore ways Native Americans create and recreate their culture through the creative process in literature.  Examine from a critical perspective autobiographies and testimonial literature.
Contemporary indigenous literature of Mexico, with a focus on the genres (poetry, fiction, drama, essay); analysis of cultural, historical, and spiritual themes, imagery, styles and performances; biographies of and influences on the Native writers themselves.
Performance of contemporary Native American literature onstage, through adaptations of selected literature as well as the creation of  original pieces.   
Special topics drawn from Native American literature. 
Seminar of critical issues faced by Native American people.
Selected topics in Native American Studies related to indigenous knowledges and worldviews from a historical, cultural, hemispheric perspective.  
Supervised internship in the CN Gorman Museum, community, and institutional settings related to Native American concerns. 
Directed reading, research and writing culminating in the completion of a senior honors thesis or project under direction of faculty advisor.
Directed reading, research and writing culminating in the completion of a senior honors thesis or project under direction of faculty advisor.
Field work with governmental and community groups, under supervision of faculty advisor and sponsor. Knowledge acquired in other courses to be applied in field work.
Guided research project that enables student to apply the theory and research principles from major course work. Final product is to be a major senior project or thesis.
Supervise tutoring in community.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.

Analysis of characteristics of the discipline of Native American Studies. Concentration of traditional and contemporary native scholarship and thought as well as theoretical and methodological consequences derived from application of these ideas.
Advanced study of selected topics or themes relevant to the field of Native American studies. Topics will be announced at the time of offering.
Examines a sample of contemporary indigenous communities from south, central and north America with the goal of understanding and evaluating the strategies adopted by Native American communities to develop and implement forms of sovereignty or autonomous self-management.
Examination of "deviance" in Native communities with focus on Native criminality in North America. Analysis of the concept of deviance from several different world views. Readings from a range of theories to incorporate varying theoretical perspective on criminality and deviance.
Examination of the signature law of the Termination Era, Public Law 83-280. Discussions to include termination, societal conformity, political consent, jurisdiction, self-determination & decolonization, and colonial relationship between Native Peoples and the United States.
History, political economy and legacies of imperial/colonial systems. Continuities and discontinuities with corporate globalization and neoliberalism. Focus on resistance and self-determination of indigenous peoples, but with comparison to other groups. 
Ethnomusicological and anthropological approaches to study of public performance in the Americas. New ways of looking at music, dance, rituals and other forms of public expressive forms normally called "folklore" or "popular culture." 
Construction of the Maya world through ethnographic writing during the present century. Deconstruction of ethnographies about the Mayans considering the modern theories and social/anthropological critiques of modern ethnographies.



An introduction to the classification, morphology, biology, and control of the nematodes attacking cultivated crops.
Relationship of nematodes to the human environment. Classification, morphology, ecology, distribution, and importance of nematodes occurring in water and soil as parasites of plants and animals.

Molecular biology and physiology of nematodes using Caenorhabditis elegans as a model, but with emphasis on plant-parasitic species. Plant responses to nematodes. Discussion of current literature emphasized.
Major concepts in population and community ecology of animal- and plant-parasitic nematodes. Current advances in techniques, theory, and basic information about nematode-host dynamics, and application to management of nematode diseases. 
Theory, foundation, principles and practices of nematode management. Techniques and equipment used to manage nematodes and methods used to analyze their effectiveness.
Biology of insect-parasitic nematodes, their effect on the host, and their potential as biological control agents of insect and other invertebrate pests. Application of ecological theory in classical and augmentative biological control.
Nematode diversity as revealed by morphological and molecular evidence. Laboratory experience focuses on structural features used in taxonomy. Phylogenetic relationships based on morphological and molecular data used to consider patterns of character change among taxa. 
Six-day demonstration and field study in applied nematology including diagnosis and prediction of nematode field problem strategies for control field plot design, and establishment in association with diverse California crops.
Planning and results of research programs, proposals, and experiments. Discussion and critical evaluation of original research being conducted by the group. Discussion led by individual research instructors for research group.


Supervised work experience in nephrology.
Research topics in Nephrology. 
Design of Doctoring curriculum for medical students in focused topic areas to be announced annually. Students design sessions, consider resource needs, and work with IORs to initiate the curriculum.
Active participation in all inpatient/outpatient clinical activities, attendance at specific lectures and conferences at UC Davis Medical Center covering the field of nephrology and fluid-electrolyte disorders.  
Independent laboratory research on a specific problem related to biochemical or immunologic causes of renal disease and/or uremic disorders in humans or animals.
Clinically relevant anatomy of the normal human nervous system, including external and internal anatomy of the brain, spinal cord, and cranial nerves. Blood supply to the brain and spinal cord. Functional neuroanatomy of motor, sensory, and cognitive systems. Application of neuroanatomical principles relevant to clinical problem solving for students entering health care professions.
Individual special study in neurophysiology and biomedical engineering is offered to qualified students. Studies on psychophysics, single-unit electrophysiology and instrumentation are offered in Davis.
For graduate students desiring to explore particular topics in depth.Lectures and conferences may be involved.
Individual special study and research in Neurophysiology and Biomedical engineering is offered at both Davis and Sacramento Medical Center.
Critical elements of neurological clinical skills (history & exam) and basic and clinical neurological concepts expected for general residency preparation. Active, didactic, experiential and independent learning to encourage maturation of general professional competencies.
Extension of basic Neurology clerkship. Designed for students with special interest in medical disorders of nervous system. By arrangementwith department, student may serve as an acting intern. Principles of neurological differential diagnosis and therapeutics emphasized.
Exposure to children with disorders of the nervous system, both in outpatient and inpatient services. Cases presented to a member of full-time faculty who will discuss clinical findings,differential diagnosis, management and therapy. Satisfies fourth-year neuroscience requirement.
Externship course for Neurology rotations not meeting the qualifications to be an Acting Internship.
Away rotation in Neurology where coursework meets the standards to be counted as an Acting Internship.
Directed readings and discussions with a comprehensive written examination at the end of course.
Approved for graduate degree credit. Laboratory investigation on selected topics.
Critical examination of issues in body weight regulation through sharedreadings, discussions, written assignments, debates and oral presentations. Limited enrollment.
Neural determinants of color appearance, and why we see the world in the way we do. Discussions center around demonstrations of color phenomena and what they tell us about the human brain. 
The mechanisms and outcomes of sexual selection (mate choice and mate competition). Theory, current models and evidence that supports or refutes the models.
The integrative roles of reproductive hormones in mammalian reproduction and health. Current theory and models regarding hormone function and use in reproductive health and contraception, and evidence that supports or refutes the models.
Current theories on the biology of aging covering genetic, biochemical, and physiological aspects.  Emphasis on critical evaluation of controversial and contemporary issues. 
Examination of various abnormalities of the eye and the important geographic and cultural factors that influence the epidemiology of those abnormalities.
Research findings and methods in neurobiology, physiology, and/or behavior. Presentation and discussion of research by faculty and students.
Work experience off and on campus in all subject areas offered in theDepartment of Neurobiology, Physiology, and Behavior. Internships supervised by a member of the faculty.


Brains and nervous systems, neurons and neural circuits. Coordination of movement. Development of nervous systems. Vision, hearing, and feature extraction by the central nervous system. The cell biology of learning and memory. Perception, cognition, and disorders of the brain. 
Experimental basis of neurobiology principles discussed in NPB 100. Topics include neurophysiology, sensory systems, motor systems, cellular neuroscience, cognitive neuroscience, and quantitative data analysis and modeling techniques. 
Computational methods and mathematical models used to study phenomena in neurobiology.
Systemic physiology with emphasis on aspects of human physiology. Functions of major organ systems, with the structure of those systems described as a basis for understanding the functions.  
Discussion and problem solving related to fundamental principles of systemic physiology as presented in NPB 101.
Selected experiments to illustrate functional characteristics of organ systems discussed in NPB 101.
Basic principles of behavioral organization in vertebrate and invertebrate animals. Underlying physiological and ethological mechanisms. The evolution of behavior, with special emphasis on behavior under natural conditions.
Study of the quantitative concepts and exemplar models used in animal behavior.
Cellular physiology with emphasis on membrane transport processes and neuronal physiology. Fundamental physical-chemical and biological mechanisms of membrane transport will be considered in relation tocytoplasmic homeostasis, communication between cells,and the cellular mechanisms of sensory and motor transduction.
Experiments in the physical and chemical processes of cells and tissues.
Introduction to the ideas, mathematical techniques and computer tools required for developing models of cellular processes in physiology and neurobiology. Applications include membrane transport, ionic channels, action potentials, Ca2+ oscillations, respiration, and muscle contraction.
Introduction to the ideas, mathematical techniques and computer tools required for developing models of cellular processes in physiology and neurobiology. Applications include membrane transport, ionic channels, action potentials, Ca2+ oscillations, respiration, and muscle contraction.
Design and execution of experiments in neurobiology, physiology, and/or behavior. Choose and design a project in consultation with the sponsoring faculty member.
Basics of cell signaling pathways, their disruption in disease, and their current utility and future potential as therapeutic targets. Focus is on signaling pathways specific to nervous, endocrine and immune systems, and those fundamental to all cells.
Functional anatomy, motor control, and biomechanics of human movement understood in the context of body structures, basic principles of physics, and functional characteristics of muscle.
Major concepts in cell biology with special emphasis on connections between cell biology and behavior. Includes: cellular metabolism, cellular sensing and signaling, membrane structure-function, molecular switches, electrical and chemical signaling, endocrine signaling, cell cycle and differentiation, cytoskeleton, and integrative examples. May be taught abroad.
Core concepts of neurobiology including single-neuron biophysics, synapses and transmitters, neuronal development, motor systems, central pattern generation, neuronal circuits, intracellular signal transduction, sensory processing, multisensory integration, autonomic nervous system, neuromodulation, learning and memory, and higher cognition and disease.
Focuses on the structure, function, and interactions of human and other animal organ systems in homeostasis and reproduction, and the response to perturbations of homeostasis; neural and endocrine signaling; skeletal muscle and movement; cardiovascular and respiratory systems; renal, digestive, immune, and reproductive physiology.
Selected comprehensive experiments in the autonomic nervous system and the cardiovascular, respiratory, and neuromuscular systems.  Emphasis on conceptual and methodological approaches in demonstrating the physiology of organ systems.
Intense and advanced presentation of concepts in cardiovascular, respiratory, and renal physiology including discussion of acid-base balance.
Gastrointestinal anatomy and physiology.  Digestion, secretion, absorption, motility, comparative physiology and pathology.  Strong emphasis on neural and hormonal regulation and on cellular mechanisms of secretion and absorption.    
Adaptive and maladaptive physiological responses to acute and chronic stress in mammals, with emphasis on humans. Role of endocrine and autonomic nervous system in stress response. Prenatal and postnatal effects of stress on cognitive and affective development. Wellness interventions.
Physiology of the various systems of birds with emphasis on digestion, respiration, excretion, and endocrine systems.
Physiological mechanisms related to reproduction, breeding efficiency and fertility, with special reference to domestic animals.
Experiments on the reproductive systems of domestic animals including male and female gametes.
Hormonal control of development, maturation and senescence from the cellular to organismal level, with emphasis on the human. Prenatal and neonatal life, childhood and adolescence, adulthood and pregnancy, as well as the endocrinology of aging.
Functional anatomy of major organ systems in vertebrates.  Each system examined from cellular to gross level in fish, birds, and mammals. Emphasis on how differentiated cell types are integrated into tissues and organs to perform diverse physiological functions.
Overview of the neuroanatomy in mammalian vertebrates, focusing on the cerebral cortex and experimental techniques. Examine changes or modifications to neural structures as a result of morphological or behavioral specializations.
Comparative neuroanatomy laboratory illustrating modern neuroanatomical techniques in determining neural connections within the mammalian brain. Includes experimentation and presentation of results.
Basic physiological mechanisms involved in sensory systems. Comparative approach to considerations of mechanosensitive systems (audition, lateral lines, touch, echolocation, equilibrium), chemosensitive systems (olfaction, taste, pheromones), photosensitive systems (vision, infrared detection, UV detection), electroreception, and pain. Emphasis on receptors.
Comparison of physiological functions in the animal kingdom: animal hormones and their functions.
Advanced presentation of concepts in endocrinology with emphasis on the role of hormones in reproduction, metabolism, and disease.
Advanced presentation of concepts in endocrinology with emphasis on the role of hormones in reproduction, metabolism, and disease.
Biochemical, physiological, genetic, and nutritional causes of important medical problems such as obesity, anorexia, heart disease and diabetes.
Genetic contributions to brain evolution, development and disorders. Topics include evolution of genomic programs of neurodevelopment and the role of genetics in autism, intellectual disability, and schizophrenia.
Immunology for undergrads interested in physiology aimed at understanding the physiological role of immune responses. Illustrated with examples of human diseases including diabetes, allergies and asthma, and emerging diseases such as Ebola and Zika.
Lectures by leading authorities and discussion of the latest research in newly emerging areas in physiology. Offered every fourth year.
Physiological aspects of interactions of organisms and environmental, cellular, system, and organismal levels. Emphasis on regulatory responses/mechanisms to thermal, pressure, gravity and light environmental variables.
Physiological adaptation to the environment among organisms in marine and estuarine habitats.
Training in scientific research from hypothesis to publication, including methods of library research. Research related to a topic covered in NPB 141.  
Effects of environmental factors on endocrine responses that affect vertebrate life history and fitness. Introduction to finite state machine theory and allostasis in life histories and coping strategies. Focus on life history stages including non-breeding, hibernation, reproduction, migration and moult.
Advanced integrative survey of biological principles of behavioral organization, emphasizing historical roots, current research directions, conceptual issues and controversies. Laboratory exercises on the description and analysis of the behavior of captive and free-living animals.
Endocrine physiology with an emphasis on the principles of behavior. Fundamental relationships between hormones and various behaviors engaged in by the organism during its lifetime. Role of hormones in behavioral homeostasis, social behavior, reproductive behavior, parental behavior, adaptation to stress.
Centers on fundamental mechanisms and pathophysiological basis for animal and human diseases. Case-based and uses animal and human diseases to help exemplify the physiological consequences of organ dysfunction.
Lectures by leading authorities and discussion of the latest research in newly emerging areas in behavioral biology. Offered every fourth year.
Issues, theoretical concepts, and methodologies in developmental neurobiology. Topics include prenatal and postnatal differentiation of neurons, and plasticity in the mature and aging brain. Integration of neurochemical, structural, physiological and behavioral perspectives.
Relationship between brain and behavior. Identification and analysis of the relevant neural circuits involved. Examples of systems to be considered are birdsong, locomotion, echolocation.
Concepts and techniques in systems neuroscience: e.g., measuring and manipulating neural activity, structure of neocortex, sensory processing, motor control, storage of information, neural codes, neural mechanisms underlying cognitive functions.
Structure and function of the mammalian visual system, from the formation of images on the retina through visually guided behavior and perception. Emphasis on biological mechanisms underlying vision.
Interdisciplinary approach to speech perception with emphasis on functional neuroanatomy and behavior. Topics include auditory processing in time and space, intelligibility in noisy environments, visual speech, evolution of vocal communication, models of speech perception, development, and hearing impairment.
Introduction to mathematics techniques used in neuroscience. Applications to neuroscience of differential equations, linear algebra, Fourier transforms, correlation and convolution, and probability theory.  
Mathematical models and data analysis techniques used to describe computations performed by nervous systems. Lecture topics include single neuron biophysics, neural coding, network dynamics, memory, plasticity, and learning. Lab topics include programming mathematical models and data analysis techniques in MATLAB.
Neurobiological basis for the effects and mechanisms of action of drugs with addictive potential, including opiates (morphine, heroin, methadone), amphetamines, cocaine, nicotine, marijuana (cannabinoids), alcohol, caffeine, and mind-altering drugs such as LSD and antidepressants.
Lectures by leading authorities and discussion of the latest research in newly emerging areas in neurobiology. Offered every fourth year.
Explores the complex interactions of the nervous and immune systems, and examine how the systems function together to serve homeostasis, behavior, and disease (such as Alzheimer's, autism, and multiple sclerosis).
Topographic map connection is a fundamental principle for establishing neural network in the brain. Provides comprehensive understanding of the current concepts of map formation in various sensory and motor nervous systems.
Examination of brain disorders from a basic science perspective to gain insights into the mechanisms of their action. Genetic, molecular, cellular, circuit, and environmental basis of a variety of brain disorders. How insights about underlying mechanisms may lead to the development of improved therapies.
Research findings and methods in neurobiology, physiology, and/or behavior. Presentation and discussion of research by faculty and students.
Work experience off and on campus in all subject areas offered in neurobiology, physiology, & behavior.
Honors project in Neurobiology, Physiology, and Behavior. Laboratory research on a specific question. Project is developed with the sponsoring faculty member and approved by the students Honors Thesis Committee. Honors thesis to be submitted upon completion of the project.
Honors project in Neurobiology, Physiology, and Behavior. Laboratory research on a specific question. Project is developed with the sponsoring faculty member and approved by the students Honors Thesis Committee. Honors thesis to be submitted upon completion of the project.
Honors project in Neurobiology, Physiology, and Behavior. Laboratory research on a specific question. Project is developed with the sponsoring faculty member and approved by the students Honors Thesis Committee. Honors thesis to be submitted upon completion of the project.
Assisting the instructor by tutoring students in one of the Department's regular courses.

Critical presentation and discussion of the most influential advanced issues in neuroimaging, emphasizing fMRI design/analysis and the integration of fMRI with EEG/MEG.
Theory and practical application of light and fluorescence microscopy in the biological sciences. Laboratory component focuses on an optics bench, where we build simple compound and confocal microscopes on an optical rail.
Study in depth of a topic in avian physiology through development of a lecture with associated instructional materials such as lesson plan, readings, presentation, and evaluation aids.
Integrative and information-processing aspects of nervous system organization.  Topics include sensory systems, motor function, sensorimotor integration, the limbic system, and the neurobiology of learning and memory.
Computational and mathematical techniques in modeling of regulatory and signaling phenomena in neurobiology and cell physiology, focusing on linear and nonlinear ordinary differential equation models. Applications include ion channel kinetics, electrical activity, signal transduction, calcium oscillations, and simple neural circuits.
The theory, methods and principles of functional neurogenomics with emphasis on the relationship to molecular mechanisms involved in development and disease of the nervous system.
Structure and function of the visual system, with emphasis on the eye and retina, including optics, anatomy, transduction, retinal synapses, adaptation, and parallel processing.
Functions of the central visual pathways and their underlying mechanisms.  Recent research on aspects of anatomy, biochemistry, electrophysiology, psychophysics, development, and genetics of the visual system.
Causes and mechanistic bases of major blinding diseases.  Recent research on aspects of anatomy, biochemistry, electrophysiology, psychophysics, development, and genetics of the visual system related to disease.
Modeling as a tool in systems neuroscience. Mathematical techniques will be introduced and used to explore advanced topics in echolocation, sound localization, electroreception, communications, and motor systems. Other topics include transforms, modeling assumptions, scales and linearity.
Mathematical models and data analysis techniques used to describe computations performed by nervous systems. Lecture topics include single-neuron biophysics, neural coding, network dynamics, memory, plasticity, and learning. Lab topics include programming mathematical models and data analysis techniques in MATLAB.
Teaches the dos and donts of writing grants in the biomedical sciences and the mechanisms of the review process.  
Core concepts and methods used in studies of learning, memory and plasticity. Behavioral paradigms and measurement approaches in human and animal studies of learning and plasticity, as well as a consideration of the functional, anatomical and neuronal mechanisms underlying brain plasticity.
Core concepts and detailed survey methods used in studies of learning, memory and plasticity, from the cellular and molecular level to the level of neural circuits. Areas of learning, memory, and plasticity research where recent progress has been made in linking across these levels of analysis.
Neurological disorders, the effect of these disorders on learning, memory and plasticity, approved therapeutic options and current research designed to improve understanding and treatment of these diseases: (i) the clinical presentation, diagnostic criteria, and existing therapies, (ii) mechanistic studies in humans and animal models, and (iii) molecular pathways involved in the disease and approaches for drug discovery. 
In-depth exploration of topics in theoretical neuroscience. Topic varies each year. Fall quarter (287A): foundational material from books and review articles. Spring quarter (287B): continuation of year's topic through readings of seminal articles from the primary literature.
In-depth exploration of topics in theoretical neuroscience. Topic varies each year. Fall quarter (287A): foundational material from books and review articles.  Spring quarter (287B): continuation of year's topic through readings of seminal articles from the primary literature.
Exploration of various important aspects of auditory physiology, behavior and psychophysics through review of original literature. New topic each quarter.
Comparative health status data, major current health issues globally, nationally, regionally. Theoretical perspectives on social, political, economic determinants of health. Health-care systems examined, linked to data, and evaluated in regards to outcomes. Aging, rural, ethnic minority populations highlighted.
Change processes in health care from political, historic, economic and sociologic frameworks. Historic and current examples of transformative change in the health-care system. Skills for system transformation through health policy, practice, research and education are emphasized. 
Critical examination of leadership from a variety of theoretical and philosophical perspectives and focuses on specific challenges in health care and leadership at various levels, e.g., patient, organizational, and policy levels.
Foundation for analyzing research, health, and systems data to answer clinical, systems, or policy questions. Use and examine multiple sources of data and information as a basis for planned change and transformation in health care.
Major types of quantitative and qualitative research design and their application to nursing and health-care research. Implications of choosing alternative research designs and critical analysis of philosophical underpinnings. Evaluation of control and validity, sampling, instruments to measure health concepts.
Provides an overview of quantitative and qualitative paradigms in scientific inquiry and the major designs related to each paradigm. First of a three-course series on research design and methods in nursing science and healthcare research.
Introduces principles of quantitative data collection and analysis as applied to major study designs in nursing and health-care research. Provides a basic foundation for producing, interpreting, and applying quantitative research findings to answer clinical, system, and policy questions.
Introduces principles of qualitative data collection and analysis as applied to major study designs in nursing and health-care research. Provides a basic foundation for producing, interpreting, and applying qualitative research findings to answer clinical, system, and policy questions.
Community-based learning and experiences including community participation, assessment, data collection and analysis using multiple approaches, community health improvement projects, collaborative leadership practice, all with the guidance of community members and nursing faculty.
Within the conceptual framework of the Foundation of Knowledge model, integrates nursing science, information science, computer science and cognitive science to acquire, process, generate and disseminate knowledge.
Interprofessional graduate course provides an introduction to rural health theory, research, policy, and practice, with an emphasis on rural health assets and disparities. 
Multidisciplinary approach to stimulate new thinking in the practice, process, and delivery of health care. Focus on improving overall health outcomes.
Race as a social construct and unequal health care distribution in the United States. Practical health care leadership to end racial inequalities in health.
Effects of globalization, political systems, local and global economies, culture, race, class, gender, and sexuality on population health.
Pathophysiological processes that contribute to different disease states across the lifespan; case studies; selective clinical decisions using current, reliable sources of pathophysiology information.
Introduction to providing safe, competent and compassionate care in a highly technical and digital environment. Emphasis on safety, quality and research to clinical practice. Accessing and analyzing reliable sources of evidence for integration in care-plan. 
Introduction to providing safe, competent and compassionate care in a highly technical and digital environment. Emphasis on safety, quality and research to clinical practice. Accessing and analyzing reliable sources of evidence for integration in care-plan.
Implementing best practices alongside technological tools and focusing on continuous quality improvement. Emphasis on providing safe, competent care in a highly technical and digital environment. Building capacity to apply concepts related to safety, quality and research to clinical practice.
Develop skills around effective decision making, fiscal and environmental stewardship, initiating and maintaining effective working relationships, using mutually respectful communication and collaboration, care coordination, delegation and supervision. Emphasis on conflict resolution, leadership and interprofessional teamwork.
Transition from nursing student to professional nurse. Focus on ethical comportment, professional values of social justice, autonomy, advocacy, altruism, human dignity, and integrity. Students must pass a mastery exit examination and complete a capstone project. 
Focuses on identification of relevant research or improvement questions specific to patient care and evaluating the pertinent research literature related to the implementation of evidence based care. First of a three-course series.
Continuation of NRS 242A. Implementation Science for Clinicians, with a focus on implementing and evaluating a change.
Advanced skills in application of implementation science into systems based practice and incorporating quality improvement and patient safety knowledge with particular focus on prevention of medical errors. 
Critical examination of leadership using theoretical and philosophical perspectives with an applied approach applicable to clinical practice. Three-course series conducted across the first, third and eighth quarters.  
Introduces professional role topics including history of the profession, the role in interprofessional teams and the health care system, transitioning to the role from other health professions, scope of practice, certification and licensure and professional organizations.
Expands upon the leadership role as it relates to their clinical practice and professional role. Professional role topics including: transitioning from student to practicing professional, scope of practice, the physician relationship, and more advanced concepts in ethics.
Designed to promote the understanding and clinical application of human anatomy, physiology, histology, immunology and pathology.
Introduction to primary health care concepts essential to the care of common medical problems seen in primary care settings. Module content will focus on various organ systems and specialty areas.
Introduction to primary health care concepts essential to the care of common medical problems seen in primary care settings.  
Introduction to primary health care concepts essential to the care of common medical problems seen in primary care settings.  
Introduction to primary health care concepts essential to the care of common medical problems seen in primary care settings.
Focuses on the spectrum of normal psychological development over the lifespan for children, adults and elders. Theories of stress and coping mechanism are presented as a framework for the assessment of individuals. 
Introduction to the major concepts in pharmacology and relevant human physiology related to pharmacotherapeutics and toxicology.
Systems based pharmacology focused on classes of drugs used to treat disorders in specialty systems.
Systems based pharmacology focused on classes of drugs used to treat disorders in specialty systems. 
Systems based pharmacology focused on classes of drugs used to treat disorders in specialty systems. 
Theoretical background to providing safe and effective care related to drugs and natural products.
Application of principles for safe and effective use of medications and natural products; use of current, reliable information to make clinical decisions.
Subject varies from quarter to quarter. Current knowledge and issues relevant to one of two fields of emphasis: population health or health systems.
Focus on the theory, research and knowledge relevant to one of two fields of emphasis: population health or health systems. Emphasis placed on reading, critique and synthesis of classic and cutting-edge research in nursing and health care. 
Focus on the theory, research and knowledge relevant to one of two fields of emphasis: population health or health systems. Emphasis placed on reading, critique and synthesis of classic and cutting-edge research in nursing and health care. 
In-depth study of topics in Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership, selected from: policy and politics in health care, health-care disparities, current issues in health care, approaches to the conduct of science, or other related areas, with year to year variation.
In-depth study of topics in Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership, selected from: policy and politics in health care, health-care disparities, current issues in health care, approaches to the conduct of science, or other related areas, with year to year variation.
Students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership graduate programs conduct research and writing under the supervision of a faculty member.
Students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership graduate programs conduct dissertation research and writing under the supervision of a faculty member.
Students will explore best practices in learner-centered teaching, performance-based curriculum models, instructional design, and assessing/evaluating student learning. Students will have experience in planning learner-centered activities that are engaging and effective in achieving desired student performance. 
Students will examine, design and develop instructional strategies that use innovative and emerging technologies to promote motivation, performance and learning in health professions education. Research findings associated with use of various emerging technologies will be examined.
Exploration of the educator role. Topics include Role Expectations, Legal and Regulatory Issues, Professional Ethics, Educational Scholarship, Individual Differences, Learning Environments, and Lifelong Learning. Placements for the optional practicum are arranged in a wide variety of settings.
Explores theoretical and conceptual frameworks to enable clinicians to understand the nature of family caregiving. Students examine and apply frameworks in order to conduct comprehensive person and family based assessments and interventions incorporating various dimensions of family caregiving.
Incorporates shared decision-making principles and group communication to address family centered care planning and challenging clinical discussions. Targets competencies needed by health professionals to partner effectively to enhance the caregiving experience and reduce negative sequelae over the caregiving trajectory.
Synthesizes assessment data and analyzes impact of technology, individual, family, sociocultural, health care system, and illness-related variables in specific family care-giving situations. Co-create comprehensive evidence based plan to facilitate the health and well-being of the family unit through shared decision-making. 
Instruction and practice of the fundamental clinical skills necessary for patient care comprise this course with a primary focus on principles of effective communication in establishing the therapeutic provider-patient relationship. 
Continuation of focus on history taking and physical examination skills with advanced/specialized content.  
Continuation of focus on history taking and physical examination skills with advanced/specialized content.  
Continuation of focus on history taking and physical examination skills with advanced/specialized content related specified systems.
Continuation of focus on history taking and physical examination skills with advanced/specialized content related specified systems. 
Continuation of focus on history taking and physical examination skills with advanced/specialized content related to specified systems. 
Continuation of focus on history taking and physical examination skills with advanced/specialized content related to specified systems. 
Continuation of focus on history taking and physical examination skills with advanced/specialized content related to specified specialty systems. 
Continuation of focus on history taking and physical examination skills with advanced/specialized content related to specified specialty systems. 
Foundational course introduces students to core concepts of clinical nursing, including clinical reasoning, professional ethics, therapeutic communication and activities of daily living. Develop skills for the provision of safe, high quality, culturally-sensitive, person-centered care across the lifespan.
Prepares students to conduct a health history assessment using developmentally and culturally appropriate approaches for individuals across the lifespan. Acquire the knowledge, understanding, and skills needed to perform, interpret and communicate a health history.
Learn concepts central to the effective management of a variety of common chronic illness and disabling conditions across the lifespan in a variety of different settings. Practice conducting in-depth health assessments of individuals with chronic conditions.
Explore the biological, psychological, cultural, societal, and environmental factors that affect psychological wellness and illness. Practice providing care to individuals and families experiencing disruptions in mental health secondary to physical or psychiatric illness, trauma or loss.
Build skills for situations involving older adults, such as in the management of complex clinical and administering and interpreting standardized assessment tools. Develop plans of care for older adults experiencing a variety of geriatric syndromes.
Focuses on family as the unit of nursing and interprofessional care. Includes influences of family on health and illness, reproductive and gender/sexuality issues, pregnancy, birth and child-rearing, and the health and illness in children and youth.
Prepares students to provide comprehensive, patient-centered nursing care for patients with acute or complex illness and injury. Theory portion focuses on concepts associated with complex physiological alterations.  
Focuses on populations & communities, and emphasizes working with diverse communities in providing health promotion, chronic disease management, transitional support and crisis intervention. Develop skills to critically analyze and shape health policy and develop accessible community resources.
Practicum experience is designed to facilitate transition to professional practice. Opportunity to choose a clinical practice area of interest and to work with a preceptor with expertise in that area. 
Interprofessional course uses experiential learning activities including simulation, role play, and case studies. Concepts include but are not limited to; communication, person-centered care, ethical decision making, end-of-life decisions, culturally appropriate care, quality and safety, social justice, and professionalism.
Interprofessional course uses experiential learning activities including simulation, role play, and case studies. Concepts include but are not limited to; communication, person-centered care, ethical decision making, end-of-life decisions, culturally appropriate care, quality and safety, social justice, and professionalism.
Interprofessional course uses experiential learning activities including simulation, role play, and case studies. Concepts include but are not limited to; communication, person-centered care, ethical decision making, end-of-life decisions, culturally appropriate care, quality and safety, social justice, and professionalism.
Interprofessional course uses experiential learning activities including simulation, role play, and case studies. Concepts include but are not limited to; communication, person-centered care, ethical decision making, end-of-life decisions, culturally appropriate care, quality and safety, social justice, and professionalism.
Interprofessional course uses experiential learning activities including simulation, role play, and case studies. Concepts include but are not limited to; communication, person-centered care, ethical decision making, end-of-life decisions, culturally appropriate care, quality and safety, social justice, and professionalism.
Interprofessional course uses experiential learning activities including simulation, role play, and case studies. Concepts include but are not limited to; communication, person-centered care, ethical decision making, end-of-life decisions, culturally appropriate care, quality and safety, social justice, and professionalism.
Students are placed in clinical settings and/or clinical simulation laboratories to observe and practice the integration of clinical skills with direct supervision by faculty.
Each of the required primary care rotations is a four-week supervised clinical practice experience in primary care, under the supervision of an appropriate community-based primary care provider per accreditation requirements.
Each of the required primary care rotations is a four-week supervised clinical practice experience in primary care, under the supervision of an appropriate community-based primary care provider per accreditation requirements.
Each of the required primary care rotations is a four-week supervised clinical practice experience in primary care, under the supervision of an appropriate community-based primary care provider per accreditation requirements.
Each of the required primary care rotations is a four-week supervised clinical practice experience in primary care, under the supervision of an appropriate community-based primary care provider per accreditation requirements.
Each of the required primary care rotations is a four-week supervised clinical practice experience in primary care, under the supervision of an appropriate community-based primary care provider per accreditation requirements.
Four-week clinical rotation under the supervision of an appropriate community-based Pediatric Medicine provider per accreditation requirements. 
Four-week clinical rotation under the supervision of an appropriate community-based womens health and prenatal care provider per accreditation requirements.
Four-week clinical rotation under the supervision of an appropriate community-based psychiatrist, psychiatric/mental health provider per accreditation requirements.
Four-week clinical rotation under the supervision of an appropriate Emergency Medicine provider per accreditation requirements.
Four-week clinical experience under the supervision of an appropriate surgical provider per accreditation requirements. 
Four-week clinical rotation under the supervision of an appropriate inpatient provider per accreditation requirements.
Two four-week selective rotations are available to accommodate student interest and/or accommodate a students clinical deficits identified by the program.  
Guided independent study of issues in biomedical ethics, with discussion of readings that are based on student interests and needs. Participation in ethics rounds.
Four-week clinical rotation under the supervision of an appropriate community-based Geriatric Medicine provider per accreditation requirements. 
Two- to four-week rotation focus on providing acute care in inpatient settings.  Students will work directly with specific inpatient units.    
Rural health rotations focus on providing care in medically underserved rural sites. Students will experience care across the continuum in ambulatory, inpatient, and community based settings. 
Clinical rotation that allow students to work directly with patient safety and quality improvement committees in various organizations. 
Working in interdisciplinary teams, will explore the theory and practical methods being employed to make improvement in health care systems while providing an opportunity for interprofessional educational experience.
Working in interdisciplinary teams, will explore advanced theory and practical methods being employed to make improvement in health care systems while providing an opportunity for interprofessional educational experience.
Inter-professional module is designed to explore the theory and practical methods being employed to improve patient safety in health care while providing an opportunity for inter-professional educational experience.
Individual research in the laboratory of a faculty member. Research problems emphasize the use of contemporary methods and good experimental design.
Individual research in the laboratory of a faculty member. Research problems emphasize the use of contemporary methods and good experimental design.
Mix of lectures, demonstrations, and dissections, emphasizing functional significance of neuroanatomy from a biological perspective, with comparisons between human and non-human brains. Emphasis placed on functional anatomy of the nervous system, integrated with cellular, molecular, cognitive, and developmental concepts.   
Critical presentation and discussion of the most influential advanced issues in neuroimaging, emphasizing fMRI design/analysis and the integration of fMRI with EEG/MEG.
Statistical methods and applications for neuroscience. Quantitative foundations covering key concepts, methods, and applications, from descriptive analysis through data science. Statistical considerations in experimental design, analysis and statistical testing in hypothesis and data-driven contexts, and responsible conduct of research in the acquisition, storage, analysis, and presentation of scientific data
Presentation of effective seminars. Student presentations of selected neuroscience topics in seminar format. Must be taken in two consecutive quarters.
Physiological aspects of cellular and subcellular organization of the nervous system. Neuronal cell biology, the structure and function of ion channels, electrical excitability, signaling cascades, sensory transduction and, mechanisms of synaptic transmission, and the cellular basis of learning and memory.
Integrative and information-processing aspects of nervous system organization. Topics include sensory systems, motor function, sensorimotor integration, the limbic system, and the neurobiology of learning and memory.
Graduate core course for neuroscience. Neurobiological bases of higher mental function including attention, memory, language. One of three in three-quarter sequence.
Key issues in developmental and molecular neurobiology. Discussion emphasis on critical evaluation of the experiments and methods described in research papers. Readings of seminal, primary research papers, reviews, and book chapters. Reading materials will be distributed one week in advance. 
Continuation of NSC 224A. Key issues in developmental and molecular neurobiology, focusing on developmental topics. Discussion emphasis on critical evaluation of experiments and methods described in associated literature.
Provides an overview of major neuropsychiatric and neurological disorders from both the clinical and fundamental science perspectives.  
Introduction to molecular and developmental neurobiology for graduate students. Topics will range from neurulation to development of sensory systems and will include modern molecular methods and their application in developmental neuroscience.
Key issues in developmental and molecular neurobiology. Topics include neural induction and patterning, neurogenesis, axon guidance, synapse development and remodeling. Discussion emphasis on critical evaluation of the experiments and methods described in primary seminal research papers and current literature. 
An advanced examination of several currrent problems in neurobiology. Topics vary in different years.
The theory, methods and principles of functional neurogenomics with emphasis on the relationship to molecular mechanisms involved in development and disease of the nervous system.
The properties and functions of non-neuronal or neuroglial cells in the mammalian central nervous system with relevance to neuronal development, physiology and injury response.
Structure and function of the visual system, with emphasis on the eye and retina, including optics, anatomy, transduction, retinal synapses, adaptation, and parallel processing.
Functions of the central visual pathways and their underlying mechanisms.  Recent research on aspects of anatomy, biochemistry, electrophysiology, psychophysics, development, and genetics of the visual system.
Causes and mechanistic bases of major blinding diseases.  Recent research on aspects of anatomy, biochemistry, electrophysiology, psychophysics, development, and genetics of the visual system related to disease.
Mathematical models and data analysis techniques used to describe computations performed by nervous systems. Lecture topics include single neuron biophysics, neural coding, network dynamics, memory, plasticity, and learning. Lab topics include programming mathematical models and data analysis techniques in MATLAB.
Teaches the do's and don'ts of writing grants in the biomedical sciences and the mechanisms of the review process.
Core concepts and methods used in studies of learning, memory and plasticity. Behavioral paradigms and measurement approaches in human and animal studies of learning and plasticity, as well as a consideration of the functional, anatomical and neuronal mechanisms underlying brain plasticity. 
Core concepts and detailed survey methods used in studies of learning, memory and plasticity, from the cellular and molecular level to the level of neural circuits. Areas of learning, memory, and plasticity research where recent progress has been made in linking across these levels of analysis.
Neurological disorders, the effect of these disorders on learning, memory and plasticity, approved therapeutic options and current research designed to improve understanding and treatment of these diseases: (i) the clinical presentation, diagnostic criteria, and existing therapies, (ii) mechanistic studies in humans and animal models, and (iii) molecular pathways involved in the disease and approaches for drug discovery.
Critical presentation and analysis of recent journal articles in neurobiology.
Presentation and discussion of recent literature on the development of sensory systems.
In-depth exploration of topics in theoretical neuroscience. Topic varies each year. Fall quarter (287A): foundational material from books and review articles. Spring quarter (287B): continuation of year's topic through readings of seminal articles from the primary literature.
In-depth exploration of topics in theoretical neuroscience. Topic varies each year. Fall quarter (287A): foundational material from books and review articles.  Spring quarter (287B): continuation of year's topic through readings of seminal articles from the primary literature.
Presentation and discussion of faculty and graduate student research in neurobiology.
Examination of research articles on cortical plasticity and changes in perception. Examples drawn from studies of the somatosensory, visual, auditory, and motor cortex.


Students may participate in ongoing neurosurgical projects or may pursue and design independent projects.
Student may participate in ongoing neurosurgical projects or may pursue and design independent projects.
Students participate in the care of neurosurgical patients in the NSICU and in the admission and surgical management of patients admitted through the Emergency Room.
Admission and follow-up of pediatric patients. Neurological history, examination, and diagnostic procedures are emphasized. Students will participate in surgical procedures and are required to attend all pediatric neurosurgery conferences.
Approved for graduate degree credit. Admission and follow-up of patients. Neurological history, examination and further diagnostic procedures emphasized. Students participate in meaningful aspects of surgical procedures and attend listed conferences, rounds, and seminars.
Clerkship in neurosurgery to be arranged at another institution with accredited residency program in neurosurgery under proper supervision.
Student will function as acting intern on neurosurgery service. Admission and management of patients. Neurological history, examination, diagnostic procedures, and surgical management are emphasized. Students participate in meaningful aspects of surgical procedures and attend required conferences and rounds.
Observation of neurosurgical care in emergency room, operating roomand hospital floors, including manner of treatment of a variety of chronic and acute neurological diseases.
Student may participate in ongoing neurosurgical projects or may pursue and design independent projects.
Advanced general nutritional concepts. Integrating nutrition with biological systems, population nutrition issues, and research approaches. Advanced concepts on lipid and protein metabolism.
Effects of nutrients at the cellular level. Principles of cell signaling and signaling modulation by nutrients. Advanced concepts of mineral and vitamin metabolism. Mineral and vitamin deviencies and associated pathologies.
Weekly conference on research problems, progress and techniques in animal sciences. 



Cellular regulation from nutritional/toxicological perspective. Emphasis: role of biofactors on modulation of signal transduction pathways, role of specific organelles in organization/regulation of metabolic transformations, major cofactor functions, principles of pharmacology/toxicology important to understanding nutrient/toxicant metabolism.
Role of nutrition in the aging process from both an organismal/cell perspective, including demographics, theories of aging, nutrition and evolution, nutritional manipulation and life-span extension, and nutrition's impact on the diseases of aging. 
Unique nutrient needs of people in different stages of the life cycle, including pregnant and lactating women, infants, children, adolescents, adults and the elderly. Physiological changes and conditions that influence nutrient needs, factors that influence food choices and appropriate dietary recommendations, and recent research are discussed.  
Chemical and physical principles that influence functional properties, nutrient content, safety, and sensory aspects of food. Emphasis on the application of these concepts in clinical nutrition.
Introduction to metabolism of protein, fat and carbohydrate: the biological role of vitamins and minerals; nutrient requirements during the life cycle; assessment of dietary intake and nutritional status. 
Critical analysis of the development of nutritional recommendations for humans. Topics include: history of modern recommendations, development of the Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) and other food guides; the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRI); administrative structure of regulatory agencies pertinent to nutrition recommendations; introduction to scientific methods used to determine the recommendations; food labeling laws; nutrition recommendations in other countries and cultures.
Critical analysis of the development of nutritional recommendations for humans. Topics include: history of modern recommendations, development of the Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) and other food guides; the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRI); administrative structure of regulatory agencies pertinent to nutrition recommendations; introduction to scientific methods used to determine the recommendations; food labeling laws; nutrition recommendations in other countries and cultures.
Methods of human nutritional assessment, including dietary, anthropometric, biochemical methods. Principles of precision, accuracy, and interpretation of results for individuals and populations.
Introduction to epidemiology as it relates to the field of nutrition, including study design, principles of epidemiologic inference, criteria for causality, and interpreting measures of disease risk.
Role of nutritional factors in embryonic and postnatal development.
Comparative differences among animals in digestion and metabolism of nutrients. Nutrient composition of feeds, digestive systems, digestion, absorption, feeding strategies.
Biochemical and physiological bases for therapeutic diets. Problems in planning diets for normal and pathological conditions.
Fundamental principles of planning and evaluating therapeutic diets and patient education for pathological conditions covered in 116A.
Biochemical and physiological bases for therapeutic diets. Problems in planning diets for normal and pathological conditions.
Fundamental principles of planning and evaluating therapeutic diets and patient education for pathological conditions covered in NUT 116B. Continuation of NUT 116AL.
Methods of assessing nutritional status. Application of chemical, microbiological, chromatographic and enzymatic techniques to current problems in nutrition.
Nutrition problems in contemporary communities and of selected target groups in the United States and in developing countries. Nutrition programs and policy, principles of nutrition education.
Issues and problems related to community-based nutritional assessment in a low-income country, major nutritional problems in low-income countries; ethical issues in human investigation; survey design, data collection techniques, and data analysis; preparation for international travel; cross-cultural communication, health, and safety while living abroad.
A six-week summer course in Peru. Implementation of a community-based nutritional assessment survey, including development of the survey instrument, selection. Taught abroad.
Nutritional anthropology from historical and contemporary perspectives; the anthropological approach to food and diet; field work methods; case histories that explore food patterns and their nutritional implications. 
Study of nutrient utilization as influenced by the unique aspects of digestion and fermentation in ruminants, both domestic and wild. Laboratories include comparative anatomy, feed evaluation, digestion kinetics using fistulated cows, computer modeling, and microbial exercises.
Comparative nutrition of animals; including laboratory, companion, zoo, and wild, animals. Digestion and metabolic adaptations required for animal species to consume diverse diets. Relation of nutrition to metabolic adaptations and physiological states, including growth, reproduction, and diseases.
Laboratory exercises leading to written reports on establishment of nutritional requirements and formulation of complete diets for laboratory, companion, zoo and wild animals. 
Principles of nutrition and feeding of fishes under commercial situations; implication of fish nutrition to the environment and conservation of endangered species.
Taught at Bodega Marine Laboratory. Effects of environmental and nutritional stress, including pollutants, on development and function in embryos and larvae of marine organisms. Emphasis on advanced experimental methods.
Critical analysis and discussion of current, controversial issues in nutrition; use of journalistic techniques to interpret scientific findings for the lay public. Students required to write several articles for campus media. 
Experiments in current nutritional problems. Experimental design:students choose project and, independently or in groups of two-three, design a protocol, complete the project, and report findings.
Foundational principles of nutrition, nutrient composition of feed ingredients, digestive systems of domestic and exotic animals, nutrient digestibility and absorption, nutrient metabolism.
Applied companion animal nutrition, focused primarily on dogs and cats. Nutritional considerations specifically related to health and longevity of companion animals. Evaluation of commercial and prescription-type diets with an emphasis on functional ingredients. Impact of physiological status and disease on nutrient requirements of the animal and nutrient utilization in the body.
Discussion of human nutrition problems. Each term will involve a different emphasis among experimental, clinical, and dietetic problems of community, national and international scope.
Introduction to research findings and methods in nutrition. Presentation and discussion of research by faculty and students.
Work experience on or off campus in practical application of nutrition, supervised by a faculty member.
Tutoring of students in nutrition courses, assistance with discussion groups or laboratory sections, weekly conference with instructor in charge of course: written evaluations.


Epidemiology, etiology, and consequences of undernutrition, with particular focus on the nutritional problems of children and women in low income populations.
Intervention programs to prevent or ameliorate nutritional problems in low-income populations. Planning, implementing, and evaluating nutrition intervention programs.
Student-selected projects to enhance laboratory skills. Independently, or in groups of two-three students, design a protocol, carry out the project, analyze the results and report the findings.
Regulatory mechanisms of carbohydrate, lipid, and protein homeostasis; mechanisms of metabolic enzyme regulation and of the metabolic hormones; homeostatic mechanisms and interactions; fuel-fuel interactions; nutrition-energy balance.
Cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying interactions of nutrition and immune function, including modulation of immunocompetence by diet and effects of immune responses on nutritional needs. Lectures and discussion explore implications for resistance to infection, autoimmunity and cancer.
Relationship of nutrition to prenatal and early postnatal development.
Comprehensive study of the biochemical, nutritional and physiological mechanisms controlling food intake, body composition and energy expenditure. Subject matter will be approached through lectures and discussions where students and staff will critically evaluate the literature.
Quantitative aspects of digestion and metabolism; principles of systems analysis. Evolution of models of energy metabolism as applied in currentfeeding systems. Critical evaluations of mechanistic models used analytically in support of nutritional research.
Issues and problems related to implementation of nutrition field research in less-developed countries, including ethics; relationships with local governments, communities, and scientists; data collection techniques and quality assurance; field logistics; research budgets; and other administrative and personal issues.
Interaction between nutrition and aging. Topics include physiological/biochemical basis of aging, age-related changes affectingnutritional requirements, nutrition and mortality rate, assessment of nutritional status in the elderly, and relationship between developmental nutrition and the rate of aging.
Discussion and critical evaluation of topics in nutrition with emphasis on literature review and evaluation in this field. Students give oral presentations on relevant topics.
Major professors lead research discussions with their graduate students.Research papers are reviewed and project proposals presented and evaluated. Format will combine seminar and discussion style.
Advanced topics in nutrition research. Multiple sections may be taken concurrently for credit.
Current research and its evaluation. Principles of experimental design and scientific background for given article. Articles summarized for posting on Internet for use by healthcare professionals.
Undergraduates with upper division standing with at least one writing course may enroll with consent of instructor. A continuation of NUT 293A, with additional special topics.
Effects of nutrition on embryology, morphogenesis, and developmental mechanisms.
Practical experience in teaching nutrition at the university level; curriculum design and evaluation; preparation and presentation of material. Assistance in laboratories, discussion sections, and evaluation of student work.


For graduate students in their initial quarter of residence. Professionalism topics are presented and examples drawn from both the biological and social sciences.
Preparation of grants for governmental agencies (particularly NIH and USDA) and private foundations. Students will write a research grant or fellowship application.
Attend clinic every third Sunday performing duties of receptionist, intake, translation, monitor. Students attend a meeting immediately after end of clinic.  There is a mandatory Monday meeting with Clinic co-directors. Students are expected to participate on various committees.   


Selected topics in reproductive biology.


Obstetrics, gynecologic and gynecological oncology experience in the delivery room, operating room, clinics and wards at UCDMC and affiliated sites. Rounds, conferences, interactive student presentations and seminars ongoing.
Obstetrics, gynecologic and gynecological oncology experience in the delivery room, operating room, clinics and wards at UCSF Fresno.  Rounds, conferences, interactive student presentations and seminars ongoing.
Obstetrics and Gynecology Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
Obstetrics and Gynecology Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
Obstetrics and Gynecology Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
Obstetrics and Gynecology Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
Obstetrics and Gynecology Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
Individual directed studies in extended preparation for modified curriculum or to complete a clinical rotation following a leave of absence.
Individual directed studies in extended preparation for remediation of all or part of clinical rotation. Clinical studies to accommodate and satisfy remedial work as directed by the Committee on Student Progress and approved by the course IOR.
Active participation in inpatient and/our outpatient care. Attendance at specified conferences; student-faculty member informal conferences. 
Work at the level of a sub intern in Inpatient and/or Outpatient settings. Students are expected to provide direct patient management.
Four week elective primarily involves direct inpatient management of women on the UCDMC Gyn/Onc service. Students will be acting at the level of a sub-intern and will work under the supervision of house staff, fellows, and attendings.  
Conduct examinations, present patients and discuss treatment regimens at the following ambulatory clinics: General Obstetrics & Gynecology, New and Return Obstetrics (including Post-Partum), High-Risk Obstetrics, Pre-Operative Clinic, and other sub-specialty clinics as assigned.
Elective focuses on the Gynecologic Subspecialty of Family Planning. Counseling and provision of contraceptive methods, experience with pelvic ultrasounds, management of spontaneous, inevitable and induced abortion and post-abortion care by both surgical and medical techniques are included.
Four week elective primarily involves direct inpatient management of women on the UCDMC L&D unit. Students will be acting at the level of a sub-intern and will work under the supervision of house staff, fellows, and attendings.
Special Studies Module, a four-week course on the topic: Basic Science Principles Relating to Gender Specific Medicine.
Interaction with patients from multiple ethnic and cultural backgrounds under the direct supervision of a physician/preceptor. Women's health issues and primary care issues in a diversely mixed population.
Interaction with patients from multiple ethnic and cultural backgrounds under the direct supervision of a physician/preceptor. Women's health issues and primary care issues in a diversely mixed population.
Interaction with patients from multiple ethnic and cultural backgrounds under the direct supervision of a physician/preceptor. Women's health issues and primary care issues in a diversely mixed population.
Interaction with patients from multiple ethnic and cultural backgrounds under the direct supervision of a physician/preceptor. Women's health issues and primary care issues in a diversely mixed population.
Explore particular topics in-depth in Obstetrics and Gynecology. Extensive contact with and oversight by instructor.
Research in Obstetrics and Gynecology arranged with instructor.
Supervised work experience in ophthalmology research. Research staff in Ophthalmology have programs in cell biology, electron microscopy, biochemistry, immunology and visual psychophysics.


Ocular disease diagnosis and management relevant to the clinical practice of future primary care physicians and others.
Participation in disciplines of neuro-ophthalmology/pediatric ophthalmology, diseases of the cornea and external eye, glaucoma and retina. 
Directed reading and discussion.
Individual research on selected topics in optics and visual physiology, cornea and external disease.


Basic and clinical science of orthopaedic surgery and rheumatology.
Introduction to general orthopaedic problems and trauma and their management in an outpatient environment, including the emergency room. Conduct orthopaedic examinations, present patients to staff rotating through trauma, hand, pediatrics, adult and foot clinics.
Acquaints student with private practice of orthopaedics in the community setting. Opportunity to observe and assist private practitioners in office, emergency room, operating room and inpatient environment. Student must provide own transportation.
Rotation designed to increase basic knowledge of musculoskeletal abnormalities at clinical level. Attention focused on selective case material. For those students who demonstrate proficiency, responsibility will be similar to that of intern. 
Advanced Orthopaedic rotation done at an approved institution. Topics may include Trauma, Sports, Spine, Pediatrics, Joint and/or Foot/Ankle.  Students are expected to perform at the level of an Intern.
Exposure to aims, methods and procedures in orthopaedic surgery via attendance at grand rounds, patient care conferences, and group discussions.
Overview of the history of medicine throughout the world to introduce medical students to landmark accomplishments and key figures in thedevelopment of health care and to provide an expanded philosophical perspective on the everchanging field of modern medicine.
Laboratory or clinical investigation on selected topics. 
Supervised work experience in otolaryngology and related fields. Final project report.

Presentation and discussion of faculty and student research in otolaryngology.
Presentations by faculty and guest lecturers on anatomy, physiology, and behaviors involved in speech production, hearing, and equilibrium. Each student expected to make one class presentation.

Formal presentations covering basic principles of reconstructive surgery, including wound healing, treatment of lacerations, skin and bone grafts, flaps, Z-plasties and revision of scars. Laboratory session utilizing animal tissues.
Provide fundamental knowledge of otorhinolaryngologic diagnosis and principles, develop facility with basic ENT instruments, provide an understanding of treatment for ear, nose and throat problems and provide knowledge of what patients should be referred for otorhinolaryngologic care.
Participation in Otolaryngology Clinic and operating room. Evaluation and management of common Otolaryngologic diseases.
Approved for graduate degree credit. Total involvement in clinical activities of the department.
Approved for graduate degree credit. Monthly review of current otolaryngologic and related literature and recent advances.
Introduction to basic research in Otolaryngology. Lectures, discussionand laboratory study of sensory and motor systems.
Approved for graduate degree credit. Participation in ongoing projects.
Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership graduate program students conduct research and writing under the supervision of a faculty member.
Instruction and practice of the fundamental clinical skills necessary for patient care comprise this course with a primary focus on principles of effective communication in establishing the therapeutic provider-patient relationship. 
Continuation of focus on history taking and physical examination skills with advanced/specialized content. 
Continuation of focus on history taking and physical examination skills with advanced/specialized content related specialty systems.
Continuation of focus on history taking and physical examination skills with advanced/specialized content related to specified systems. 
Continuation of focus on history taking and physical examination skills with advanced/specialized content related to specified systems. 
Continuation of focus on history taking and physical examination skills with advanced/specialized content related to specified systems. 
Continuation of focus on history taking and physical examination skills with advanced/specialized content related to specified  systems. 
Students are placed in clinical settings and/or clinical simulation laboratories to observe and practice the integration of clinical skills with direct supervision by faculty. 
Principles of single-species ecology and evolution. Topics include ecology of individuals, population growth models, structured populations, life history strategies, stochastic populations, basic population genetics theory, deleterious alleles in natural populations,and molecular population genetics.
Principles of multi-species communities. Topics include competition, mutualism, metapopulations, food webs and trophic cascades, interactions between simple ecological communities, island biogeography, succession, and large-scale patterns.
Principles of microevolution and macroevolution. Topics include evolutionary quantitative genetics, analysis of hybrid zones, speciation, the fossil record, biogeography, and phylogeny reconstruction.
Adaptation and speciation, and biochemical and morphological evolution in plants and animals with emphasis on the appropriateness of different methods of analysis.
Insect parasitoids will be investigated as model systems to address current topics in behavioral, population, and evolutionary ecology. Theory will be synthesized and critical empirical tests of ecologicalhypotheses emphasized.
Introduction to theoretical and empirical research in plant population biology. Emphasis placed on linking ecological and genetic approaches to plant population biology.
Advanced seminar that critically examines problems relevant to evolutionary patterns among the invertebrates.
Interface between animal behavior, ecology and evolution. New developments in behavioral ecology development and testing of hypotheses in this discipline.
Biweekly field trips to acquaint students with plant and animal communities, biodiversity, and ecological and evolutionary research opportunities in northern and central California.
Field course conducted over spring break and four weekends at Bodega Bay, emphasizing student projects. Ecological hypothesis testing, data gathering, analysis, and written and oral presentation of results are stressed.
Mathematical methods used in population biology. Linear and nonlinear difference equation and differential equation models are studied, using stability analysis and qualitative methods. Partial differential equation models are introduced. Applications to population biology models are stressed.
Numerical methods for simulating population dynamics using the computational software package R. Emphasis  placed on model formulation and development, theoretical concepts and philosophical principles to guide simulation efforts, model parameterization, and implementing simulations with R.
An integrative consideration of biological invasions, including an overview of concepts from ecology, ecological theory, evolution, genetics, philosophy, and other areas. Emphasis on potential contributions of each area for interdisciplinary problem-solving. 
An integrative consideration of biological invasions, including an overview of concepts from history, sociology, communications, law, policy, management, and other areas. Emphasis on potential contributions of each area for interdisciplinary problem-solving. 
A year-long interdisciplinary collaborative project focusing on biological invasions, resulting in a paper or other suitable product presented at a symposium at the conclusion of the project.
Critical presentation and evaluation of current literature and ongoing research in evolutionary biology. 
Critical presentation and evaluation of current literature and ongoing research in ecology. Requirements include active participation in weekly discussions and the presentation of a paper or chapter once per quarter.
Reading, reports and discussion on current topics in animal behavior, with a focus on topics that lie at the interface between animal behavior, ecology and evolution.  
Seminars presented by visiting lecturers, UC Davis graduate students and faculty. 
Presentation and discussion of faculty and graduate student research in population biology.
Seminar presented by visiting lecturers, UC Davis faculty and graduate students. 
Recent developments in theoretical and experimental biogeography, historical biogeography and related themes in systematics, the biology of colonizing species, and related topics. 


The first of three PBGG graduate core courses. Coverage includes (1) plant genes,  (2) biotechnology, (3) genomes and gene flow, (4) principles of plant systematics, and (5) the evolution of flowering plants. 
The second of three PBGG graduate core courses. Coverage includes (1) embryo development, (2) cytoskeleton and vesicle trafficking, (3) cell walls, (4) cell growth, (5) secondary metabolism, (6) plastids and (7) senescence.
The third of three PBGG graduate core courses. Coverage includes (1) plant water relations,  (2) cellular & long distance transport processes, (3) mineral nutrition, (4) environmental impacts on growth & development, (5) stress perception & responses, (6) canopy processes, and (7) plant interactions with other organisms.
Recent progresses in plant cell biology. Intracellular motility in plant cells. Common techniques associated with the progress of plant cell biology.  
Study of the mechanisms of physiological adaptation of plants to their environment.
Study of the fundamental processes involved in the physiological action of herbicides. Detailed consideration of the fate of herbicides in plants.
Lectures focus on the structure, analysis, synthesis, and development-related metabolism of cell walls. Discussions center on analysis of scientific papers related to lecture topics.
A survey of the concepts of plant development and organization. Examines plant cells, tissues, and organs with special emphasis on experimentalevidence for mechanisms regulating developmental processes.
Molecular aspects of higher plant biology with emphasis on gene expression. Plant nuclear and organelle genome organization, gene structure, mechanisms of gene regulation, gene transfer, and special topics related to development and response to biological and environmental stimuli.
Presentation and discussion by faculty and graduate students of research projects in botany.
Student-given seminars on topics in plant biology, with critiques by instructor and peers. How to give a seminar, including preparation of visual and other teaching aids. Topic determined by instructor in charge.
Review of current literature in botanical disciplines. Disciplines and special subjects to be announced quarterly. Present and analyze assigned topics.
Intensive study of selected topics in the postharvest biology of fruits, vegetables, and ornamentals.

Consideration of the problems of teaching botany, especially of preparing for and conducting discussions, guiding student laboratory work, and the formulation of questions and topics for examinations.


Opportunity to observe and participate in primary medical care in a practicing pediatricians office. Participation in history-taking and physical examination will be at discretion of preceptor and dependent on students experience. Evaluation by student.
Opportunity to participate in practice of preceptor, performing such tasks as history taking, physical examination, and patient management.
Lecture series covers major topics in pediatrics with case presentations and panels from pediatric subspecialists. Topics include, but are not limited to: cardiology, pulmonology, nephrology, gastroenterology, critical care, and primary care pediatrics. 
Elective is designed to combine for study a variety of aspects of the physiology, anatomy and biochemistry of the fetus and newborn with relevant clinical examples of disorders in each of the 10 topics that will be discussed.
Eight week clinical clerkship providing students with the opportunity to learn fundamentals of caring for the pediatric patient by participating in nursery, ambulatory and inpatient services at UCDMC and affiliated clinical sites.  Rounds, conferences, student presentations ongoing.
Eight-week clinical clerkship providing students with the opportunity to learn fundamentals of caring for the pediatric patient by participating in nursery, ambulatory and inpatient services at UCSF Fresno. Rounds, conferences, student presentations ongoing.
Longitudinal Pediatrics Clerkship runs concurrently with Internal Medicine, Family Medicine and Psychiatry for 32 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty.
Longitudinal Pediatrics Clerkship runs concurrently with Internal Medicine, Family Medicine and Psychiatry for 32 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty.
Longitudinal Pediatrics Clerkship runs concurrently with Internal Medicine, Family Medicine and Psychiatry for 32 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty.
Longitudinal Pediatrics Clerkship runs concurrently with Internal Medicine, Family Medicine and Psychiatry for 32 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty.
Pediatrics Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
Pediatrics Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
Pediatrics Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
Pediatrics Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
Pediatrics Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
Longitudinal Clerkship runs concurrently with Primary Care and Psychiatry for 24 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. On-going patient write-ups, rounds, conferences are required.
Longitudinal clerkship runs concurrently with Primary Care and Psychiatry for 24 weeks.  Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty.  On-going patient write-ups, rounds, conferences are required.
Longitudinal clerkship runs concurrently with Primary Care and Psychiatry for 24 weeks.  Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty.  On-going patient write-ups, rounds, conferences are required.
Individual directed studies in extended preparation for modified curriculum or to complete a clinical rotation following a leave of absence.
Individual directed studies in extended preparation for remediation of all or part of clinical rotation. Clinical studies to accommodate and satisfy remedial work as directed by the Committee on Student Progress and approved by the course IOR.
The Ward Acting Intern functions in a manner similar to that of a pediatric intern. The Acting Intern takes admissions in the regular sequence and is expected to take night call. 
Supervised experience in pediatric care on outpatient service at UCDMC. Student functions as Acting Intern with appropriate supervision by residents and attending faculty.
Inpatient and outpatient experience in diagnosis and management of oncologic and hematologic disorders in children. Laboratory experience and participation in clinical investigation may be arranged.
Inpatient and outpatient experience in diagnosis and management of endocrine endocrine disorders in children. Laboratory experience and participation in clinical investigation may be arranged. 
Diagnostic and therapeutic aspect of the medical and surgical high-risk neonate. Student expected to take night call.
Supervised experience in a variety of pediatric subspecialty clinics. Limited enrollment.
Supervised experience in a variety of pediatric subspecialty clinics.
Inpatient and outpatient experience in diagnosis and management of cardiologic disorders in children. Laboratory experience and participation in clinical investigation may be arranged.
Inpatient and outpatient management of pediatric patients with pulmonary diseases. These will include but will not be limited to cystic fibrosis, asthma, and other forms of chronic pulmonary diseases as well as congenital abnormalities.
Inpatient and outpatient experience in diagnosis and management of renal disorders in children. Laboratory experience and participation in clinical investigation may be arranged.
Inpatient and outpatient experience in diagnosis and treatment of infectious disease of infants and children. Laboratory and clinical investigation may be arranged.
Inpatient and outpatient experience in diagnosis and management of neurological disorders in children. Students will also participate in other pediatric subspecialty clinics which serve children with neurological disorders. Does not satisfy the fourth-year neurology requirement.
Inpatient and outpatient experience in diagnosis and management of gastroenterology disorders in children. Laboratory experience and participation in clinical investigation may be arranged.
Under supervision, students will see patients in the UC Davis clinic and at a number of community-based sites. Emphasis on the socially-mediated problems that face adolescents, including substance abuse, STD's, pregnancy, depression and suicide. One hour of lecture each week.
Work at the level of a sub intern in Inpatient and/or Outpatient settings. Expectation is to provide direct patient management.
Evaluation and support of critically ill infants and children. In general, student expected to take night call every third night during rotation. 
Develop advanced knowledge, communication skills and attitudes necessary to provide compassionate, knowledgeable, and expert care to patients who may be at increased genetic risk for disease. Seminars cover ethical and legal principles, epidemiology, and genetics.  
In-depth experience with Intellectual & Developmental Disability across the lifespan. 
Elective is available for students interested in exploring the fascinating world of the fetus and neonate. Designed to combine the basic sciences with relevant clinical examples of disorders.
Individual research project in pediatric subspecialty areas (cardiology, endocrinology, hematology, metabolism, newborn physiology and others) may be arranged with faculty member. Independent research by student will be emphasized and long-term projects are possible.
Continuation of PER 001. Introduction to listening, speaking, reading and writing skills in Persian and to Persian culture.
Continuation of PER 002. Introduction to listening, speaking, reading and writing skills in Persian and to Persian culture.
Integrated presentation of listening, speaking, reading and writing skills as well as cultural topics in intermediate Persian. 
Integrated presentation of listening, speaking, reading and writing as well as cultural topics in Intermediate Persian.
Integrated presentation of listening, speaking, reading and writing skills as well as cultural topics in Intermediate Persian.
Directed group study. 
Special study.
Integrated work on reading, listening, discussion and writing about modern Persian cultural production using fiction and poetry as well as cinema and theory.
Integrated work on reading, listening, discussion, writing about medieval Persian culture with a focus on lyric and narrative poetry and representative selections of literary prose, rhetoric, biography, history, religious and philosophical discourse.
Teaching practicum. 
Individually guided research, under the supervision of a faculty member, on a Performance Studies topic related to the student's proposed dissertation project to produce a dissertation prospectus.
Individually guided research, under the supervision of a faculty member, on a Performance Studies topic related to the student's proposed dissertation project, to produce a dissertation prospectus.
Individually guided research, under the supervision of a faculty member, on a Performance Studies topic related to the student's proposed dissertation project to produce a dissertation prospectus. 
Designed to provide cohort identity and faculty exchange. Opportunity to present papers, hear guest   lecturers, and see faculty presentations, gather for organizational and administrative new, exchange of information and make announcements. Must be taken every year that a Performance Studies graduate is registered, prior to taking the Qualifying Examination.



Work on approaches to theatre, dance, film/video, design and performance, with a focus on methodology and professional development.
Supervised work experience in pharmacology and related fields.

Supervised work experience in pharmacology and related fields.


Survey of the process by which a drug is discovered, developed and made available to the public. Topics include drug identification and optimization, safety testing, clinical evaluation, regulatory issues, intellectual property, formulation, and the global pharmaceutical industry.
Detailed characterization of the mechanisms involved in cardiac excitationcontraction coupling, alterations that occur in heart disease and pharmacological interventions. Topics include cardiac contractile apparatus, action potential, Ca cycling, excitationtranscription coupling, cardiac inotropy, heart failure and arrhythmias.
Functional genomics (how genetic variation and epigenomics affect gene expression), with an emphasis on clinical relevance and applications. Topics include genetic variation and human disease, cancer therapeutics, and biomarker discovery.
Research seminars on current topics in Pharmacology.


Principles in pharmacology, including pharmacokinetics, drug metabolism and the actions, uses and toxicities of the major classes of drugs.
Principles in pharmacology, including autonomic pharmacology, general anesthetics, neuropharmacology and sedative/hypnotics.
Treatment of respiratory and cardiovascular disease, central nervous system drugs, GI, Toxicology and chemotherapy. Specific topics include: asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, hypertension, congestive heart failure, and the treatment of arrhythmias. Pain Management, depression, psychosis, acid reflux, IBS and toxicology.
Basic principles of alternative medical systems (e.g., traditional Chinese, Ayurvedic, Tibetan), alternative practices (e.g., chiropractic, osteopathy, naturopathy, homeopathy, herbalism, guided imagery/meditation, massage therapy), and mind/body connection are presented as introduction to integrating alternative treatments into traditional medicinal practice.
Seminar in pharmacology for medical students.
Assist instructor by tutoring medical students in preparation for one of the departmental courses that is a component of the required curriculum of the School of Medicine.
Special study in pharmacology for medical students.
Directed research in pharmacology for medical students.
Sport specific advanced comprehensive training, instruction, and practice for the highly skilled collegiate varsity athlete. Development and improvement of performance skills utilizing motor-learning, nutritional science, and motivational theory. Classes offered in all UC Davis intercollegiate athletic sports.
For intercollegiate student-athletes. Balancing academic and athletic demands. Academic, psychological, and sociocultural issues which influence success as a college student-athlete.
Provides the student with the knowledge, organizational procedures, and skill development necessary to provide for water safety and save his/her own life or the life of another in an aquatic emergency.
Theoretical knowledge and practical experience necessary for the organization and teaching of swimming and lifesaving classes. (AmericanRed Cross Water Safety Instructors Certificate awarded upon successful completion of necessary requirements.)
Work experience in the application of physical activity programs to teaching, recreational, clinical or research situations under department faculty supervision.
Tutoring of students in lower division physical activity courses. Weekly meetings with instructor in charge of courses. Written reports on methods and materials required.
Tutoring in the community in physical activity related projects under the guidance of the Physical Education faculty. Regular meetings with instructor in charge and written report required.


Tutoring or teachers aide in physical education activities, including athletic coaching, in public schools under the guidance of a regular teacher with supervision by a departmental faculty person.
Prevention, care, and rehabilitation of injuries incurred by athletes. Laboratory on anatomy, emergency care, physical therapy methods, and taping techniques.
Advanced study of the evaluation and management of athletic injuries, including mechanism of injury, biomechanics and pathophysiology. Current topics in athletic training.
Technical, tactical, and strategic aspects of coaching. Methods for organizing and delivering effective information in coaching. Biomechanical basis of motor skills and motor learning principles applied to coaching. Classroom development of coaching skills and outside observations of coaching required.
Synthesis and application of basic components of sport psychology, sport pedagogy, and sport physiology and basic management and administration of athletics in public high schools.
Principles of teaching health education in the public schools.
Work experience in the application of physical activity programs to teaching, recreational, clinical or research situations under department faculty supervision.
Tutoring of students in lower division physical activity courses. Written reports on methods and materials required.
Tutoring in the community in physical education related projects under the guidance of the Physical Education faculty. Regular meetings with instructor in charge and written report required.


Introduction to principles, theories, material, and practices of elementary school physical education program.
The methods of teaching group and individual activities for grades K-12; program planning, class management, organization, and evaluation.


Theories of being. Such topics as reality, substance, universals, space, time, causality, becoming, body, experience, persons, freedom, and determinism. Views of the nature and method of metaphysics. Anti-metaphysical arguments.
Analysis of the concept of knowledge. The relation between knowledge, belief and truth. Development of foundationalist, coherentist and externalist theories of justified belief. Examination of skepticism.
Interpretation of human thought and behavior through the lens of evolutionary theory. Topics include the nature/nurture debate concerning cognitive and other mental capacities and traits, and the interaction between evolution, learning and development.
Logical, metaphysical, epistemological, and existential aspects of selected religious concepts and problems.
Nature of testability and confirmation of scientific hypotheses; nature of scientific laws, theories, explanations, and models. Problems of causality, determininism, induction, and probability; the structure of scientific revolutions.
Scientific method in biology. Nature of biological theories, explanations, and models. Problems of evolutionary theory, ecology, genetics, and sociobiology. Science and human values.
The nature of the social sciences, their subject matter and methods. Similarities to and differences from natural and life sciences. Predicting and explaining human behavior. Behaviorism. Reduction, holism, and individualism. Related moral issues. The social sciences and philosophy.
Philosophical problems of space and time. Philosophical implications of space-time theories, such as those of Newton and Einstein. Topics may include the nature of geometry, conventionalism, absolutist versus relationist views of space and time, philosophical impact of relativity theory.
Predicate logic syntax and semantics. Transcription between predicate logic and English. Models, truth-trees, and derivations. Identity, functions, and definite descriptions. Introduction to concepts of metatheory.
The metalogic of classical propositional and first-order predicate logic.  Consistency, soundness and completeness of both propositional and predicate logic.  The Lwenheim-Skolem theorem for predicate logic. Undecidablity of predicate logic.
Study of some classic texts from the history of philosophical writing on central problems of ethics, taking the form either of a survey or concentrated examination of selected historical figures. Readings from such philosophers as Aristotle, Butler, Hume, Kant, Mill.
Moral philosophy studied through examination of moral problems and the moral principles and common sense intuitions that bear on them. Problems discussed may include: animal rights, fetal rights, euthanasia, justice and health care, war, nuclear deterrence, world hunger, environmental protection.
Study of fundamental concepts and problems in ethical theory through an examination of classical and contemporary philosophical theories of ethics. Among the theories that may be discussed are utilitarianism, virtue theory, theories of natural rights, Kantian ethical theory, and contractarianism.
Advanced investigation of questions about the nature and foundations of morality. Among the topics that may be discussed are moral realism andanti-realism, cognitivism and non-cognitivism, types of relativism, moral skepticism, normative language and normative belief.
Intensive examination of some central concepts of political thought such as the state, sovereignty, rights, obligation, freedom, law, authority, and responsibility.
Philosophical theories of the nature of law, legal obligation, the relation of law and morals. Problems for law involving liberty and justice: freedom of expression, privacy, rights, discrimination and fairness, responsibility, and punishment.
Conceptual and ethical issues concerning the environment. Extension of ethical theory to animals, all life, and ecosystem wholes. Topics may include contemporary environmental issues such as global warming, sustainability and biodiversity.
In-depth coverage of topics in bioethics including resource allocation, measures of health and disease/disability, public health, and ethical issues related to research on human subjects and emerging technologies. 
Nature of art, of artistic creation, of the work of art, and of aesthetic experience; nature and validity of criticism; relations of art to its environment.
Survey of prominent contemporary approaches to leading problems in action theory. Problems include issues about the nature of intentional action and the conceptual character of explanations of actions in terms of the agent's reasons.
Philosophical issues concerning rationality in its various forms. Focus is on theoretical and practical reasoning and conditions for rational belief, choice, and action. Possible additional topics include rationality and human limitations; paradoxes of rationality; varieties of irrationality; rationality and objectivity.
Self-evidence, intuition, the (in)fallibility and (in)defeasibility of a priori methods. Analytic, formalist and Kantian accounts of how knowledge can be acquired through reasoning and intuition alone, without recourse to empirical methods.
Nature of formal systems and mathematical theories. Selected topics include logical and semantical paradoxes; foundations of mathematics; set theory, type theory, and intuitionistic theory; philosophy of geometry; philosophical implications of Gdels incompleteness results.
Introduction to theoretical artificial intelligence with a focus on nonmonotonic logic, Bayesian networks, and learning theory.
Survey of the main systems of modal logic, including Lewis systems S4 and S5. Possible worlds semantics and formal proofs. Applications to epistemology, ethics, or temporality.
Alternatives to standard truth-functional logic, including many-valued logics, intuitionist logics, relevance logics, and non-monotonic logics.
Formal (mathematical) approaches to belief revision, knowledge and deduction, meta-knowledge, (multi-agent) epistemic logic, Bayesian confirmation, Bayes nets, epistemic and probabilistic paradoxes. 
Survey of issues and views concerning reference, or how words refer to things.  Topics include names and descriptions, the distinction between sense and reference, the puzzle of non-referring terms, causal theories of reference, and possibility and necessity.
Comparative treatment of theories about the relationship between truth and meaning. Topics include: the identification of meaning with truth conditions, the nature of propositions, theories of linguistic understanding, the roles of mind and world in determining meaning.
Philosophical issues and positions concerning the meaning and use of language. Topics include the distinction between meaning and implication, the roles of context and convention in language use, speaker meaning versus linguistic meaning and speech act theory.
Philosophy of Socrates as found in the Socratic dialogues of Plato. Topics include the Socratic practice of refutation, its method, epistemological foundation, and moral purpose; Socratic eudaimonism and Socratic virtue theory; the paradoxes of Socratic intellectualism.
Positions and arguments of the major philosophical schools of the Hellenistic period: Stoicism, Epicureanism, and Scepticism. Focus is on ethical, epistemological and metaphysical questions and their interconnectedness. 
Major Christian, Islamic, and Jewish philosophers of the Middle Ages.
Survey of the main movements in 19th-century philosophy on the European continent. Idealism in Schopenhauer and Hegel, dialectical materialism in Marx, irrationalism in Kierkegaard, Nietzsche and Dostoevsky.
Consideration of central issues such as meaning/reference, analytic/synthetic, reductionism, formal and ordinary language, essential properties, ontological commitment, possible world semantics; influential works by philosophers such as Russell, Moore, Wittgenstein, Austin, Carnap, Quine, Putnam, Kripke, van Fraassen.
Survey of the main movements in 20th-century philosophy on the European continent, including phenomenology, existentialism, post-structuralism and post-modernism. Philosophers covered are Husserl, Heidegger, Sartre, Foucault, Derrida. 
Study of the metaphysical views of such pre-Socratic figures as the Milesians, the Pythagoreans, Heracleitus, Parmenides, Empedocles, Anaxagoras, and the atomists.
Examines Platos most important contributions in metaphysics, epistemology, psychology, cosmology, ethics and political philosophy. Dialogues will be selected from Platos middle and later writings.
Overview of Aristotles most central and influential writings. Topics selected from fields such as metaphysics, physics, ethics, logic, and psychology.
Philosophical writings of Ren Descartes. Topics include the refutation of skepticism, the nature and existence of mind and body, the existence of God, and the foundations of science.
Philosophical writings of Spinoza and Leibniz in the 17th century. Topics drawn from both philosophers include: the nature and existence of God, the nature of mind, the relation between mind and body, human freedom, metaphysical monism vs. pluralism.
Principal metaphysical works of John Locke and George Berkeley. Topics include abstract ideas, existence of matter, primary and secondary qualities, essence, substance, the existence of God, and the nature of scientific knowledge.
David Hume's Treatise of Human Nature and related writings. Topics include empiricism, space, causality, belief, skepticism, the passions, and morality.
Immanuel Kant's Critique of Pure Reason and related writings. Topics include the nature of human cognition, space and time, a priori concepts, substance, causality, human freedom, and the existence of God.
Development of Gottlob Frege's views about language and logic. Formulation of his grand mathematical idea known as logicism and how it led to the philosophy of language.
Special topics in History of Philosophy.
Special topics in Metaphysics.
Special topics in Theory of Knowledge.
Special topics in Ethics.
Special topics in Political Philosophy.
Special topics in Philosophy of Law.
Special topics in Aesthetics.
Special topics in Philosophy of Mind.
Special Topics in Philosophy of Science.
Special topics in Philosophy of Language.
Special topics in Logic.
Completion of honors research project under direction of an instructor. Consult departmental major advisor for list of instructors available in a given quarter.
Completion of honors research project under direction of an instructor. Consult departmental major advisor for list of instructors available in a given quarter.


Intensive study of core works in a selected area of philosophy. Intensive experience in philosophical writing, discussion, and presentation of written work.
Intensive study of core works in a selected area of philosophy. Intensive experience in philosophical writing, discussion, and presentation of written work.
Topics vary from quarter to quarter and may include the following: What are things? Do names refer to things? If so, how? Do things have essential properties? What is the nature of necessity? 
Topics vary from quarter to quarter. Sample topics include belief, skepticism, justification, externalism, naturalized epistemology.
Topics in the philosophy of mind, such as the mind-body problem, mental representation, consciousness, intentionality.
Specific research conducted and prepared for publication by advanced students in a team setting. Topics include knowledge representation and learning in neural networks, the nature and formal properties of mental representation. 
Intensive treatment of one (or more) topic(s) in the philosophy of physics, such as foundations of spacetime theories, the interpretation of quantum mechanics, or foundations of statistical mechanics. 
Intensive treatment of one (or more) topic(s) in the philosophy of biology, such as foundations of evolutionary theories, reductionism in biology, sociobiology and cultural evolution. 
Treatment of one or more general topics of current interest in philosophy of science. Topics may include scientific explanation, theories of confirmation, scientific realism, reduction in physics and biology. 
Philosophical issues in logic and math. Topics may include nature of logical and mathematical truth or knowledge, correctness of logical systems, foundations of mathematics, metaphysical and epistemological presuppositions, applications to philosophical problems and formalization of philosophical theories.
Intensive study of advanced logic, including set theory, metatheory of predicate logic, and modal logic.
Topics may include morality and motivation, objectivity in ethics, the relationship between the factual and the moral. Topics vary from quarter to quarter. 
Advanced studies in political philosophy. Topics vary but may include distributive justice, enforcement of morality by the state, equality, obligation to obey the law, social contract theory. 
Intensive treatment of one or more topic(s) in environmental ethics, such as biodiversity, sustainability, composition of the moral community, invasive species, endangered species, applications of ethical theories to contemporary environmental issues.
Study of philosophical issues raised by language, such as the nature of semantic content, proper semantics for verbs of propositional attitude, feasibility and limitations of formal semantics and pragmatics for natural languages. 
Advanced seminar designed for analysis of arguments, doctrines, and texts from Plato's works.  Methods of argumentation and interpretation are especially stressed.  Topics vary according to instructor.
Advanced seminar designed for analysis of arguments, doctrines, and texts from Aristotle's works. Methods of argumentation and interpretation are especially stressed. Topics vary according to instructor.
Intensive study of a topic in the philosophy of Kant, in such areas as metaphyics, theory of knowledge, ethics.  
Topics in the history of philosophy. Topics vary according to instructor from quarter to quarter. 



Supervised work experience in reproduction.
Contributions of animals to human society, including historic, anthropologic, developmental, human health and therapeutic perspectives, as well as effects of humans on animals. One field trip required.
Supervised work experience in Reproduction.
A very thorough coverage of simple random sampling, stratified sampling, cluster sampling, systematic sampling and other sampling methods applied extensively in epidemiology and other health-related disciplines. Emphasis on application of the sampling methods.
Multivariate procedures covered are principal component analysis, factor analysis, Two-group and k-group multivariate ANOVA, multivariateregression, Two-group and k-group discriminant analysis and repeated measures analysis, cluster analysis, and canonical analysis. Emphasis is on application of procedures.
Epidemiological, biological and ecological features of some major infections shared by humans and other animals.  Wildlife and domestic animals zoonoses of major health and economic significance are presented to illustrate how knowledge of zoonoses epidemiology is essential for implementing control measures.
In-depth study of topics in canine genomics and genetics. Topics will vary annually, but can include positional cloning, whole genome association, complex traits and linkage disequilibrium. Students will lead discussions on assigned readings.
In-depth study of topics related to the application of genetic tools to wildlife conservation. Topics will vary annually, but may include use of non-invasive methods of genetic assessment and monitoring of wildlife populations. Students will lead discussions on assigned readings.
Principles and applications in analysis of epidemiologic data.  Methods of analyzing stratified and matched data, logistic regression for cohort and case-control studies, Poisson regression, survival-time methods.
Theory of epidemics and mathematical modeling concepts for infectious diseases to include discrete and continuous time models, their use to explore disease dynamics and investigate prevention and control strategies for human and veterinary infectious diseases.
Mechanics. Introduction to general principles and analytical methods used in physics with emphasis on applications in applied agricultural and biological sciences and in physical education.
Continuation of PHY 001A. Heat, optics, electricity, modern physics.
Introduction to general principles and analytical methods used in physics for students majoring in a biological science.
Continuation of PHY 007A. 
Continuation of PHY 007B. 
Introduction to general principles and analytical methods used in physics for physical science and engineering majors. Classical mechanics.
Continuation of PHY 009B. Fluid mechanics, thermodynamics, wave phenomena, optics.
Electricity and magnetism including circuits and Maxwell's equations.
Introduction to physics concepts developed since 1900. Special relativity, quantum mechanics, atoms, molecules, condensed matter, nuclear and particle physics.
Classical mechanics. Same material as PHY 009A in greater depth. For students in physical sciences, mathematics, and engineering.
Special relativity, thermal physics. Continuation of PHY 009HA.
Waves, sound, optics, quantum physics. Continuation of Physics 9HB.
Electricity and magnetism.  Continuation of Physics 9HC.
Application of quantum mechanics.  
Emphasis varies: survey of basic principles or a deeper exploration of some particular branch. Past topics included black holes, space time, and relativity; physics of music; history and philosophy; energy and the environment; and natural phenomena. 
Modern ideas about the unifying ideas of fractal geometry, chaos and complexity.  Basic theory and applications with examples from physics, earth sciences, mathematics, population dynamics, ecology, history, economics, biology, computer science, art and architecture.
Modern ideas about the unifying ideas of fractal geometry, chaos and complexity.  Basic theory and applications with examples from physics, earth sciences, mathematics, population dynamics, ecology, history, economics, biology, computer science, art and architecture.
Experimental techniques. Design of circuits. Data analysis, sources of noise,  statistical and systematic uncertainties. Light sources, detection, and measurement in basic optical systems.
Examination of a special topic in Physics through shared readings, discussions, written assignments, or special activities such as laboratory work.


Introduction to computational physics and to the computational resources in the physics department. Preparation for brief programming assignments required in other upper division physics classes.
Introduction to computational physics and to the computational resources in the physics department. Preparation for brief programming assignments required in other upper division physics classes.
Introduction to the mathematics used in upper division physics courses, including applications of vector spaces, Fourier analysis, partial differential equations. 
Introduction to the use of computational techniques to solve the mathematical problems that arise in advanced physics courses, complementing the analytical approaches emphasized in PHY 104A.
Applications of complex analysis, conditional probability, integral transformations and other advanced topics.
Principles and applications of Newtonian mechanics; introduction to Lagranges and Hamiltons equations
Principles and applications of Newtonian mechanics; introduction to Lagranges and Hamiltons equations
The continuum hypothesis and limitations, tensors, isotropic constitutive equations, and wave propagation.  Applications such as elastic solids,heat flow, aerodynamics, and ocean waves.
The phenomena of diffraction, interference, and polarization of light, with applications to current problems in astrophysics, material science,and atmospheric science. Study of modern optical instrumentation. Open to non-majors.
The laboratory will consist of one major project pursued throughout the quarter, based on modern applications of optical techniques.
Theory of electrostatics, electromagnetism, Maxwell's equations, electromagnetic waves.
Theory of electrostatics, electromagnetism, Maxwell's equations, electromagnetic waves.
Theory of electrostatics, electromagnetism, Maxwell's equations, electromagnetic waves.
Introduction to classical and quantum statistical mechanics and their connections with thermodynamics. Theory is developed for the ideal gas model and simple magnetic models and then extended to studies of solids, quantum fluids, and chemical equilibria.
Introduction to the methods of quantum mechanics with applications to atomic, molecular, solid state, nuclear and elementary particle physics.  Extensive problem solving.
Angular momentum and spin; hydrogen atom and atomic spectra; perturbation theory; scattering theory.
Experimental and theoretical study of important analog electronic circuits.  Linear circuits, transmission lines, input impedance, feedback, amplifiers, oscillators, noise.
Continuation of PHY 116A. Introduction to the use of digital electronics and microcomputers in experimental physics.  Nonlinear electronics, integrated circuits, analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog converters, transducers, actuators.
Introduction to techniques for making physical measurements using computer-based instrumentation.
Experimental techniques and measurements in solid-state physics. Three-six experiments performed depending on difficulty. Individual work is stressed. Thorough write-ups of the experiments are required.
Experimental techniques and measurements in nuclear and particle physics. Students perform three to six experiments depending on difficulty. Individual work is stressed. Thorough write-ups of the experiments are required.
Techniques of measurement and analysis designed to avoid systematic error and maximize signal/noise ratio. Illustrative examples of optimal filters ranging from condensed matter to cosmology.
Survey of basic nuclear properties and concepts requiring introductoryalpha, beta and gamma decay.
Continuation of PHY 129A. Nuclear reactions, neutrons, fission, fusion accelerators, introduction to meson and particle physics, nuclear astrophysics, and applications of nuclear physics and techniques to mass spectrometry, nuclear medicine, trace element analysis.
Properties and classification of elementary particles and their interactions. Experimental techniques. Conservation laws and symmetries. Strong, electromagnetic, and weak interactions. Introduction to Feynman calculus.
Properties and classification of elementary particles and their interactions. Experimental techniques. Conservation laws and symmetries. Strong, electromagnetic, and weak interactions. Introduction to Feynman calculus.
Survey of fundamental ideas in the physics of solids, with selected device applications. Crystal structure, x-ray and neutron diffraction, phonons, simple metals, energy bands and Fermi surfaces, semiconductors, optical properties, magnetism, superconductivity.
Survey of fundamental ideas in the physics of solids, with selected device applications. Crystal structure, x-ray and neutron diffraction, phonons, simple metals, energy bands and Fermi surfaces, semiconductors, optical properties, magnetism, superconductivity.
Topics vary, covering areas of contemporary research in physics.
Chemical composition, structure, energy sources and evolutionary history of stars, with equal emphasis on both the observational data and theoretical models, including black holes, neutron stars and white dwarfs and the formation of substellar masses.
Structure, contents, and formation of our Milky Way galaxy, viz. its shape and size, the nature of the interstellar medium, stellar populations, rotation curves, mass determination and evidence of dark matter.
Structure and evolution of galaxies and clusters of galaxies, including distance and mass determination, galaxy types and environments, active galactic nuclei and quasars, gravitational lensing and dark matter, global cosmological properties.
Applications of classical and quantum mechanics, thermodynamics, statistical mechanics, and electricity and magnetism to astrophysical settings such as the Big Bang, degenerate white dwarf and neutron stars, and solar neutrinos.
Definition of the mathematical frame work for the description of the gravitational field, introduction of the dynamical equations of Einstein governing its evolution and review of the key solutions, including black holes and expanding universes.
Contemporary knowledge regarding the origin of the universe, including the Big Bang and nucleosynthesis, microwave background radiation, formation of cosmic structure, cosmic inflation, cosmic acceleration and dark energy.
Experimental techniques, data acquisition and analysis involving laboratory astrophysics plus stellar, nebular and galaxy digital imaging, photometry and/or spectroscopy. Students perform three experiments. Individual work stressed. Minimum 10-15 page journal style articles of two experiments are required.
Experimental techniques, data acquisition and analysis involving laboratory astrophysics plus stellar, nebular and galaxy digital imaging, photometry and/or spectroscopy. Students perform three experiments. Individual work stressed. Minimum 10-15 page journal style articles of two experiments are required.
Formation of the cosmic web, including dark-matter halos and galaxies within them. Components of the Universe (dark matter, gas, stars) and their dynamical evolution. Gravitational collapse and virialization. Gas dynamics, heating, and cooling. Galactic star formation and stellar dynamics. Emphasis on theoretical concepts, computational methods, and simulations.
Impact of humankind on the environment are discussed from the point of view of the physical sciences. Calculations based on physical principles will be made, and the resulting policy implications are considered.
Supervised work experience requiring the application of physics principles and techniques in a professional setting, including but not limited to industry and national laboratories.
Open only to Physics and Applied Physics majors who satisfy the College of Letters and Science requirements for entrance into the Honors Program. Independent research project at a level significantly beyond that defined by the normal physics curriculum.
Open only to Physics and Applied Physics majors who satisfy the College of Letters and Science requirements for entrance into the Honors Program. Independent research project at a level significantly beyond that defined by the normal physics curriculum.
Open only to Physics and Applied Physics majors with senior standing. Preparation of a senior thesis on a topic selected by the student with approval of the department.

Theoretical approaches in classical mechanics including the use of generalized coordinates and virtual work; variational calculus; Lagrange equations; symmetries, conservation laws, and Noether theorem; Lagrangian density; Hamilton formalism; canonical transformations; Poisson brackets; and Hamilton-Jacobi equations.
Theoretical approaches in electromagnetics including static electromagnetic fields; Maxwell's equations; plane waves in various media; magnetohydrodynamics; diffraction theory; radiating systems; and special relativity.
Theoretical approaches in electromagnetics including static electromagnetic fields; Maxwell's equations; plane waves in various media; magnetohydrodynamics; diffraction theory; radiating systems; and special relativity.
Linear vector spaces, operators and their spectral analysis, complete sets of functions, complex variables, functional analysis, Greens functions, calculus of variations, introduction to numerical analysis.
Linear vector spaces, operators and their spectral analysis, complete sets of functions, complex variables, functional analysis, Green's functions, calculus of variations, introduction to numerical analysis.
Analytic techniques to solve differential equations and eignevalue problems. Physics content of course will be self-contained, and adjusted according to background of students.
Formal development and interpretation of non-relativistic quantum mechanics; its application to atomic, nuclear, molecular, and solid-state problems; brief introduction to relativistic quantum mechanics and the Dirac equation.
Formal development and interpretation of non-relativistic quantum mechanics; its application to atomic, nuclear, molecular, and solid-state problems; brief introduction to relativistic quantum mechanics and the Dirac equation.
Formal development and interpretation of non-relativistic quantum mechanics; its application to atomic, nuclear, molecular, and solid-state problems; brief introduction to relativistic quantum mechanics and the Dirac equation.
Foundations of thermodynamics and classical and quantum statistical mechanics with simple applications to properties of solids, real gases, nuclear matter, etc. and a brief introduction to phase transitions.
Further applications of thermodynamics and classical and quantum statistical mechanics. The modern theory of fluctuations about the equilibrium state, phase transitions and critical phenomena.
Theory of groups and their representations with applications in condensed matter.
Theory of groups and their representations with applications in elementary particle physics.
Comprehensive study of the nucleon-nucleon interaction including the deuteron, nucleon-nucleon scattering, polarization, determination of real parameters of Smatrix, and related topics.
Study of nuclear models, including shell model, collective model, unified model. Energy level spectra, static momenta, and electromagnetic transition rates.
Study of nuclear scattering and reactions including the optical model and direct interactions. Beta decay and an introduction to weak interactions.
Advanced topics in nuclear theory; theory of quantum-mechanical scattering processes. Exact formal theory and models for two-body scattering.
Advanced topics in nuclear theory; theory of quantum-mechanical scattering processes. Exact formal theory and models for three-body scattering.
Relativistic quantum mechanics of particles; techniques and applications of second quantization; Feynman diagrams; renormalization.
Continuation of 230A, with selected advanced topics, such as S-matrix theory, dispersion relations, axiomatic formulations.
Renormalization theory and applications, including dimensional regularization, Ward identities, renormalization group equations, coupling constant unification, and precision electroweak calculations.
Current research trends in string theory, with topics ranging from perturbative worldsheet methods, nonperturbative aspects and dualities, AdS/CFT correspondence, string field theory, etc. 
Modern geometric methods in theoretical physics, with topics ranging from from pseudo-Riemannian differential geometry and topology with application to general relativity, black holes, and string theory.
Topics in condensed matter physics: Crystal structure; one-electron theory; transport and optical properties of semiconductors; phonons, electron-phonon scattering.
Topics in condensed matter physics: transport and optical properties of metals and quantum structures; experimental measurement the Fermi surface and of phonon spectra.
Review of second quantization.  Interacting electron gas, electron-phonon interaction and effects, including instabilities of electronic systems.  Topics in the theory of superconductivity and magnetism.
Topics chosen from areas of current research interest.
Topics chosen from areas of current research interest.
Experimental and theoretical fundamentals of surface and interface physics and chemistry, including electronic and magnetic structure, thermodynamics, adsorption kinetics, epitaxial growth, and a discussion of various spectroscopic and structural probes based on photons, electrons, ions, and scanning probes.
Experimental and theoretical fundamentals of surface and interface physics and chemistry, including electronic and magnetic structure, thermodynamics, adsorption kinetics, epitaxial growth, and a discussion of various spectroscopic and structural probes based on photons, electrons, ions, and scanning probes.
Experimental and theoretical fundamentals of surface and interface physics and chemistry, including electronic and magnetic structure, thermodynamics, adsorption kinetics, epitaxial growth, and a discussion of various spectroscopic and structural probes based on photons, electrons, ions, and scanning probes.
Phenomenology and systematics of strong, electromagnetic, and weak interactions of hadrons and leptons; determination of quantum numbers; quarks and quarkonia; deep inelastic scattering; the quark parton model; experiments at hadron colliders and electron-positron colliders.
Electroweak interactions; phenomenology of the Standard Model of SU(2)LxU(1); weak interaction experiments; properties of and experiments with W and Z vector bosons; Glashow-Weinberg-Salam model and the Higgs boson; introduction to supersymmetry and other speculations.
Collider physics.  Topics include quark and gluon distribution functions and the computation of cross sections; Large Hadron Collider and International Linear Collider phenomenology; collider and detector characteristics; extracting models from data; software tools for analyzing experimental data.
Construction of supersymmetric models of particle physics; superfields; supersymmetry breaking the minimal supersymmetric standard model; supergravity. Collider phenomenology of supersymmetry. Dark matter phenomenology.
Construction of supersymmetric models of particle physics; superfields; supersymmetry breaking the minimal supersymmetric standard model; supergravity. Collider phenomenology of supersymmetry. Dark matter phenomenology. Not offered every year. 
Advanced topics in supersymmetry.  Topics include holomorphy, the Affleck-Dine-Seiberg superpotential, Seiberg duality for SUSY QCD, dynamical SUSY breaking, Seiberg-Witten theory, superconformal field theories, supergravity, anomaly and gaugino mediation, and the AdS/CFT correspondence.
Topic varies. 
Application of ideas from statistical mechanics to the financial markets. Market dynamics from a physics and systems perspective, including the statistical distributions of returns, the dynamics of prices, and models for the markets.
Nonlinear dynamics, deterministic chaos, bifurcations, pattern formation, symbolic dynamics, measurement theory, stochastic processes, elementary information theory, information in complex systems, computational laboratory.
Structural complexity, computational mechanics, information measures, causal inference, applications to complex materials, quantum dynamics, and nonequilibrium thermodynamics, computational laboratory.
An introduction to general relativity. Differential geometry and curved spacetime; the Einstein field equations; gravitational fields of stars and black holes; weak fields and gravitational radiation; experimental tests; Big Bang cosmology.
Introduction to early universe cosmology: the Big Bang, inflation, primordial nucleosynthesis, dark matter, dark energy, and other topics of current interest
Growth of structure from small density inhomogeneities in the early universe to the diverse structures observable today. Use of observable properties (cosmic microwave background, gravitational lensing, peculiar velocities, number density, etc.) to constrain models of structure formation and fundamental physics.
Survey covering galactic and extragalactic X-ray and gamma-ray astronomy, radiative processes, and techniques of high-energy astrophysics.
Survey covering measurement and signal analysis techniques for astrophysics and cosmology throughout the electromagnetic spectrum.
Survey covering current areas of research on extragalactic objects, their physical properties, origin, evolution, and distribution in space.
Introduction to research methods in astrophysics and cosmology. Problems and examples from observational and theoretical work will be included.
Reading and discussion to help physics graduate students develop and maintain familiarity with the current and past literature in their immediate field of research and related areas.
Designed to give Physics graduate students an in-depth appreciation of career opportunities with a graduate degree in physics.  Professional physicists, mainly from outside academia, will give seminars describing both research and career insights.
Presentation and discussion of topics of current research interest in physics. Topics will vary weekly and will cover a broad spectrum of the active fields of physics research at a level accessible to all physics graduate students. 
Presentation and discussion of topics of current research interest in nuclear physics.
Presentation and discussion of topics of current research interest in elementary particle physics.

Presentation and discussion of topics of current research interest in condensed matter physics.
Presentation and discussion of topics of current research interest in Cosmology.
Presentation and discussion of topics of current research interest in the areas of quantum field theory, string theory and gravity. 
Discussion and analysis of recent research in how students construct understanding of physics and other science concepts and the implications of this research for instruction.

Analysis of recent research on science/physics teaching and learning and its implications for teaching labs, discussions, and discussion/labs with an emphasis on differences between conventional and active-engagement instructional settings.  The appropriate role of the instructor in specific instructional settings.  
Practical experience in methods and problems related to teaching physics laboratories at the university level, including discussion of teaching techniques, analysis of quizzes and laboratory reports and related topics. Required of all Physics Teaching Assistants.

Examination of a special topic in a small group setting.
Technical and/or professional experience on or off campus. Supervised by a member of the Plant Biology faculty.
Primarily for lower division students.

Survey of the California flora, emphasizing recognition of important plant families and genera and use of taxonomic keys to identify species. Phylogenetic relationships among families. Principles of systematics and taxonomy. Two Saturday field trips.
Structural anatomy of vascular plants. Training in basic tissue sectioning, staining, and use of the compound microscope.
Diversity and classification of angiosperms (flowering plants) on a world scale, and current understanding of the origin of angiosperms and evolutionary relationships and trends within them based on morphological and molecular evidence.
Plant cell as a functional unit. The processes of absorption, movement, and utilization of water and minerals. Water loss, translocation, photosynthesis, respiration.
Discussion of problems and applications relating to principles presented in PHY 111. Problems assigned weekly showing novel applications of principles described in PHY 111; repare answers to be delivered orally during the class period.
Introduction to the mechanisms and control systems that govern plant growth and development and the responses of plants to the environment. Strong emphasis on vegetative development of flowering plants.
Discussion of problems and applications relating to principles presented in PLB 112. Students will be assigned problems each week showing novel applications of the principles described in PLB 112 and will prepare answers to be delivered orally during class period.
Molecular and cellular aspects of the growth and development of plants and their response to biological and environmental stresses. Primary focus on processes unique to plants. Experimental approaches will be emphasized.
Discussion of topics and applications related to principles presented in PLB 113. Assigned topics each week show novel applications of the principles described in PLB 113; discussion of topics during class period.
Introduction to the form, development and evolution of vascular plants. Emphasis given to the form and development of reproductive structures in ferns and seed-producing plants as a basis for determining evolutionary relationships.
The study of the interactions between plants, plant populations or vegetation types and their physical and biological environment. Special emphasis on California. Four full-day field trips and brief write-up of class project required.
Origin and evolution of invasive plant species and weeds, reproduction and dispersal, seed ecology, modeling of population dynamics, interactions between invasive species, native species, and crops, biological control. Laboratories emphasize design of competition experiments and identification of weedy species.
Analysis of interactions necessary for viruses to infect plants.Interactions among insect vectors and host plants involved in the plant-virus life cycle. Evolutionary aspects of the molecular components in viral infection and modern approaches to the interdiction of viral movement.
The biochemistry of important plant processes and metabolic pathways. Discussion of methods used to understand plant processes, including use of transgenic plants.
Origins of crops and agriculture, including main methodological approaches, centers of crop biodiversity, dispersal of crops, genetic and physiological differences between crops and their wild progenitors, agriculture practiced by other organisms, and role and ownership of crop biodiversity.
Systematics, ecology, evolution, and morphology of fungi. Importance of fungi to humans.
Systematics, ecology, evolution, and morphology of fungi. Importance of fungi to humans.
Provides an opportunity for undergraduate students to formulate experimental approaches to current questions in plant biology and to carry out their proposed experiments.
Introduction to research methods in plant biology. Design of field or laboratory research projects, survey of appropriate literature, and discussion of research by faculty and students.   
Technical and/or professional experience on or off campus.  Supervised by a member of the Plant Biology Department faculty.
Independent study of selected topics under the direction of a member or members of the staff. Completion will involve the writing of a seniorthesis.
Assisting the instructor by tutoring students in one of the Department's regular courses.


Practical experience in acting as teaching assistant in Plant Biology courses.  Learning activity: hands on experience in preparing for and conducting discussions, guiding student laboratory work, and the formulation of questions and topics for examinations.
Principles and practices of growing edible mushrooms, including culture maintenance, basic mushroom substrate preparation, composting, spawn generation techniques, inoculation methods, harvesting, and pests and pest management.
The nature, cause, and control of plant diseases.
Analysis of interactions necessary for viruses to infect plants.Interactions among insect vectors and host plants involved in the plant-virus life cycle. Evolutionary aspects of the molecular components in viral infection and modern approaches to the interdiction of viral movement.
How fundamental physiological and biochemical activities of fungi impact the destructive and beneficial roles of these organisms in nature. Utilization and manipulation of fungi for biotechnological and industrial applications.
Collection and identification of mushrooms and other fleshy fungi based on macro and microscopic features.
Examination of the development and deployment of agricultural biotechnologies, particularly transgenic crop plants, microorganisms and animals, with consideration of conventional agriculture, public perceptions of technologies, food safety, environmental impact, public policies and regulations.
Systematics, ecology, evolution, and morphology of fungi. Importance of fungi to humans.
Systematics, ecology, evolution, and morphology of fungi. Importance of fungi to humans.
Ecological roles of fungi as saprobes, mutualists and parasites in native and managed ecosystems. Physiological and reproductive strategies associated with adaptations to diverse habitats.
Microscopic and molecular methods used in the identification of mushroom species; molecular characterization including PCR-amplification of ribosomal nuclear DNA, digestion of the product with restriction enzymes, and DNA sequencing; a one-day field trip is required. 
Work experience off and on campus, supervised by a member of the faculty.
Case-studies approach to analysis of plant diseases caused by bacteria, fungi, oomycetes, and viruses, including impacts, etiology, pathogen taxonomy and epidemiology, biochemical and genetic aspects of pathogen-host interactions, virulence and resistance, and approaches to disease control.
Case-studies approach to analysis of plant diseases, including emerging diseases, caused by bacteria, fungi, nematodes, and oomycetes: impacts, etiology, pathogen taxonomy, epidemiology, biochemical and genetic aspects of pathogen-host interactions, virulence, resistance, disease control and statistical analysis.
Clinical study of diseases of vegetable and field crops with emphasis on etiology, epidemiology, diagnosis, and control. Field trips required.
Continuation of PLP 205A. Four-day field trip investigating diseases of vegetable and field crops.
Clinical study of fruit, nut, and vine crops diseases with emphasis on etiology, epidemiology, diagnosis, and control. PLP 205 may be taken concurrently.
Clinical study of fruit, nut, and vine crops diseases with emphasis on etiology, epidemiology, diagnosis, and control. PLP 205 may be taken concurrently.
Discussion of plantmicrobe interactions, focused on the underlying cellular, biochemical, and molecular events that determine the diseased state.
Advanced treatment of molecular biology and genetics of filamentous fungi and yeasts, including gene structure, organization and regulation;plant pathogenesis; secretion; control of reproduction; reproduction; molecular evolution; transformation; and gene manipulation.
Physiology, cell biology and biochemistry of fungi. Topics include mycotoxins, epidemiology and nature of emerging and re-emerging fungal diseases, fungicides, and fungicide resistance.
Study of plant pathogenic microorganisms including taxonomy, biology, molecular mechanisms of disease, and plant disease management.  Topics include quorum sensing, rhizosphere biology, genomics, virulence factors, and host plant resistance genes.
Viruses as causal agents of plant disease and as tools for manipulating plants; structures of virus particles; mechanisms of transmission, replication, and spread in the plant; cytology and molecular biology in susceptible and resistant reactions to virus infection; virus disease control.
Presentation, evaluation, and critical discussions of research activities in the area of advanced plant pathology; primarily designed for graduate students.
Review and evaluation of current literature and research in biochemistry and molecular biology of plant microbe interactions.
Holistic introduction to the underlying botanical and physiological principles of cultivated plants and their response to the environment. Includes concepts behind plant selection, cultivation, and utilization. Laboratories include discussion and interactive demonstrations.
Hands-on experience with plants cultivated for food, environmental enhancement and personal satisfaction. Topics include establishing a vegetable garden, pruning and propagation activities, growing flowers and ornamental plants, and the role of plants in human health and well-being.
Introduction to the art and science of using and growing flowers to harness the power that is represented by their aesthetic beauty.  Handling, production, arranging, breeding and marketing of flowers. Emphasis on potted plants and cut-flowers.
Dependence of human societies on plant and plant products. Plants as resources for food, fiber, health, enjoyment and environmental services. Sustainable uses of plants for food production, raw materials, bioenergy, and environmental conservation. Global population growth and future food supplies.
Concepts of computing and applications using personal computers, spreadsheets, database management, word processing and communications.
Concepts of computing and applications using personal computers, spreadsheets, database management, word processing and communications. 


Principles of energy capture and photosynthesis, water use, and nutrient cycling. Conversion of these resources into products (carbohydrates, proteins, lipids, and other chemicals) by plants. Emphasis on the relationships between environmental resources, plant metabolism and plant growth.
Techniques and instruments used to study plant metabolic processes, including water relations, respiration, photosynthesis, enzyme kinetics, microscopy, immunochemistry, and nitrogen fixation. Quantitative methods, problem solving, and practical applications are emphasized.
Principles of the cellular mechanisms and hormonal regulation underlying plant growth, development, and reproduction. Emphasis on how these processes contribute to the harvestable yield of cultivated plants and can be managed to increase crop productivity and quality.
Laboratory exercises in plant growth and development and their regulation, including photomorphogenesis, plant growth regulators, plant anatomy, seed germination, fruit ripening and senescence. Includes field trips to illustrate relationships to cropping and marketing systems.
Principles of plant interactions with their physical and biological environments and their acquisition of the resources needed for growth and reproduction. Emphasis on how management practices and environmental conditions affect crop productivity.
Techniques and instruments used to study plant interactions with their physical and biological environments, including light responses, transpiration, microclimatology, nutrient availability and utilization, biomass accumulation. Quantitative methods and modeling are emphasized.
Focus on the interaction between agriculture and the environment to address the principles required to analyze conflict and develop solutions to complex problems facing society.
Survey of the California flora, emphasizing recognition of important plant families and genera and use of taxonomic keys to identify species. Phylogenetic relationships among families. Principles of systematics and taxonomy. Two Saturday field trips.
Introduction to the ecological principles of integrated pest management, biology of different classes of pests and the types of losses they cause, population assessment, evaluation of advantages and disadvantages of different techniques used for pest management, IPM programs.
Horticultural principles applied to production and management systems for vegetable crops. Laboratory and discussion illustrate efficient field management and resource use practices.
Principles, practices and technologies of agronomic cropping systems, including crop systematics, physiology, agroecology, equipment, and management. Cropping systems analysis and integration of economic and ecological decision-making considerations involved in crop production. One weekend field trip required.
Forages as a world resource in food production. Ecological principles governing the adaptation, establishment, growth and management of perennial and annual forages, including pastures, rangelands and hay; aspects of forage quality which affect feeding value to livestock.
Physiology, growth, development and environmental requirements of fruit trees and the cultural practices used to maintain them. Emphasis on the application of biological principles in the culture of commercially important temperate zone fruit tree species.
Reproductive biology of tree crop species.  Biological principles of fruit production, tree nutrition and orchard management for optimizing cropping.  Laboratories emphasize hands-on work with orchard tree systems that are done specifically to produce the crop.
Introduction to the form, development, and evolution of vascular plants. Emphasis given to the form and development of reproductive structures in ferns and seed-producing plants as a basis for determining evolutionary relationships.
Application of statistical methods to design and analysis of research trials for plant, animal, behavioral, nutritional, and consumer sciences.  Basic concepts and statistical methods are presented in lectures, laboratories emphasize data processing techniques, problem solving, and interpretation in specialized fields.
Modeling approaches commonly used in plant and crop applications. Fundamentals of how plant/crop models are developed and considerations regarding their limitations. Example model applications include degree-day and radiation-use-efficiency models of growth and yield, phenological models, and crop coefficients.
Introduction to the ecological principles and processes important for an understanding of the dynamics of range ecosystems. Emphasis on ecological and evolutionary concepts underlying management strategies for conserving biological diversity and environmental quality in rangelands.
Taxonomy and identification of western grasses. Development of skills in using plant identification keys. Ecology and evolution of grasses in grazing ecosystems. Given the week following spring quarter.
Feeding ecology of grassland herbivores and its importance in evolution of herbivore communities and social systems. Optimal foraging, interspecific interactions, and primary productivity are considered as factors structuring natural and managed grassland and savannah systems.
Relationships and interactions between plants and people, including human perceptions, management, and uses of plants, influences of plants on human cultures, and effects of human activity on plant ecology and evolution. Concepts, questions, methods, and ethical considerations in ethnobotanical research.
Biological structure and function of trees as organisms; understanding of forests as communities and as ecosystems; use of forests by humans; tree phenology, photosynthesis, respiration, soil processes, life histories, dormancy, forest biodiversity, and agroforestry.
Ecology, distribution, and species of California's plant communities. Environmental forces that determine these communities, the threats they face, and their conservation and restoration opportunities.
Visits to many of northern California's plant communities, from the north coast to the Central Valley to the Sierras. Discussion of community ecology and hands-on identification of species. Two Saturday and two three-day field trips required.
Interdisciplinary analysis of agricultural production and food systems with primary emphasis on biophysical processes. General concepts governing the functioning of temperate and tropical agroecosystems in relation to resource availability, ecological sustainability, and socio-economic viability. Comparative ecological analyses of agroecosystems.
Basic principles of transmission genetics, cytogenetics, population and quantitative genetics, and molecular genetics.  Practical aspects of genetic crosses and analysis of segregating populations.
Basic and applied aspects of plant tissue culture including media preparation, micropropagation, organogenesis, embryogenesis, anther culture, protoplast culture and transformation.
Principles, methods and applications of plant breeding and genetics to the improvement of crop plants. Illustration of how plant breeding is a dynamic, multidisciplinary, constantly-evolving science. Laboratory emphasizes hands-on experience in the basics of breeding through experiments.
Stress concepts and principles; molecular, physiological, developmental and morphological characteristics enabling plants to avoid or tolerate environmental stresses; stress acclimation and adaptation processes; responses of wild and cultivated species to drought, flooding, nutrient deficiencies, salinity, toxic ions, extreme temperatures, etc.
Evolution and scope of plant nutrition; essential elements; mechanisms of absorption and membrane transporters; translocation and allocation processes; mineral metabolism; deficiencies and toxicities; genetic variation in plant nutrition; applications to management and understanding ecological effects of nutrient availability or deficiency.
Traditional and evolving use of trees in agricultural ecosystems; their multiple roles in environmental stabilization and production of food, fuel, and fiber; and socioeconomic barriers to the adoption and implementation of agroforestry practices.
Application of fundamental concepts and approaches in landscape and ecosystem ecology to urban ecosystems. Ecological and social drivers and responses. Landscape heterogeneity, nutrient dynamics, invasive species, altered hydrology and climate, and pollution. Discussion of primary literature.
Integration of concepts to understand and manage ecosystems in a complex and changing world. Emphasis on interactions among biotic, abiotic and human factors and changes over space/time. Local to global controls over water, carbon and nutrients across ecosystems/landscapes.
Integration of concepts to understand and manage ecosystems in a complex and changing world. Emphasis on interactions among biotic, abiotic & human factors and changes over space/time. Local to global controls over water, carbon and nutrients across ecosystems/landscapes.
Hands-on field exposure to various aspects of ecological restoration throughout the seasonal restoration cycle with real-world practitioners. Emphasis on grassland/rangeland, riparian, and oak woodland communities.
Overview of production and handling systems of major pomological crops, analysis of current cultural and harvesting problems and concerns associated with commercial fruit growing.
Overview of production and handling systems of major pomological crops, including analysis of current cultural and harvesting problems and concerns associated with commercial fruit growing.
Principles and practices of propagating plants covering anatomical, physiological, and practical aspects.
Overview of physiological processes related to maturation and senescence of plant products and their responses to postharvest stresses. Targeted approaches and technologies to maintain product quality and limit postharvest disorders. 
Basic concepts and current knowledge of issues relevant to postharvest biology. Mechanisms of fruit ripening, senescence, programmed cell death. Metabolism and functions of phytohormones, carbohydrates, lipids, pigments, flavor compounds, and phytonutrients at molecular and cellular levels.
Overview of microorganisms on fresh produce, pre- and postharvest factors influencing  risk of microbial contamination, attachment of microorganisms to produce, multiplication during postharvest handling and storage, and methods of detection. Mock outbreak trial and presentation of science-based forensic discovery.
Weed biology and ecology, methods of weed management, biological control, herbicides and herbicide resistance. Weed control in managed and natural ecosystems; invasive species. Laws and regulations. Application of herbicides. Sight and software-assisted identification of common weeds.
Brief survey of common and invasive fresh water plants and macroalgae, their reproductive modes, physiology, growth (photosynthesis, nutrient utilization), development (hormonal interactions), ecology, modes and impacts of invasion, and management. Two Saturday field trips required. 
Preparation and review of a scientific proposal.  Problem definition, identification of objectives, literature survey, hypothesis generation, design of experiments, data analysis planning, proposal outline and preparation.
Formulating experimental approaches to current questions in plant science; performance of proposed experiments.
Seminar on topics related to alternative theories, practices and systems of agriculture and the relationship of agriculture to the environment and society. Scientific, technological, social, political and economic perspectives.
Weekly conference on research problems, progress and techniques in the plant sciences.
Work experience on or off campus in subject areas pertaining to plant and environmental sciences. Internship supervised by a faculty member.
Methods of teaching children and youth about fruit and vegetable production and consumption. Lesson and activity planning for garden and farm field trips. Basic biology, ecology, plant science, and crop management practices. Mentorship in experiential learning. Preparation of garden site.
Independent study of selected topics under the direction of a member or members of the staff. Completion will involve the writing of a senior thesis.    
Intensive study of postharvest considerations and current procedures and challenges in postharvest handling for fruits, nuts, vegetables, and ornamentals in California.  Scheduled first two weeks immediately following last day of spring quarter. 
Leading small voluntary discussion or lab groups affiliated with one of the department's regular courses.
Introduction to the research process and statistical methods to plan, conduct and interpret experiments.
Multivariate linear and nonlinear models. Model selection and parameter estimation. Analysis of manipulative and observational agroecological experiments. Discriminant, principal component, and path analyses. Logistic and biased regression. Bootstrapping. Exercises based on actual research by UC Davis students.
Review of postharvest biology of fruits and nuts and biotechnological approaches to address postharvest challenges.  Morphology, biology and postharvest handling of fruits and nuts are presented along with current research, including biotechnology, and discussion of future research needs and approaches.
Comparative physiology of harvest vegetables; emphasis on maturation, senescence, compositional changes, physiological disorders and effects of environmental factors. Concepts and research procedures.
Integration of modern biotechnology and classical plant breeding including the impact of structural, comparative and functional genomics on gene discovery, characterization and exploitation. Covers molecular markers, plant transformation, hybrid production, disease resistance, and novel output traits.
Preview of genome structure, mapping, gene tagging and development of other genetic resources applied to improvement of major vegetables. For graduate students contemplating a career in modern vegetable breeding and biotechnology.
Philosophy, methods, and problems in developing improved plant species. Topics include: inbreeding, heterosis, progeny testing, breeding methodology, index selection, germplasm conservation, and breeding for stress resistance. Laboratories include tours of breeding facilities and calculation and interpretation of quantitative data.
Cross-disciplinary review of forest biology, including physiology, genetics, pathology, ecology, and silviculture.

Designed for graduate students who desire teaching experience but are not teaching assistants.

Supervised work experience in pathology and related fields.

Focused around the mechanisms of function of the central nervous system under normal and pathogenic conditions. Seminars lead by various speakers from UC Davis and other Institutions, both domestic and international.
Group Study provides the opportunity for a faculty member to work with students in a focused manner.

Current specimens are sectioned, discussed, and clinical correlations proposed.
Presents an integrated introduction to mechanisms of the central and peripheral nervous system injury. Gain an understanding of pathological mechanisms underlying disease, the anatomic and molecular manifestations of pathologic processes of the CNS and PNS.
Anatomic and clinical pathology of organ system human disease with an emphasis on integration with clinical medicine. Topics include hematopathology and neuropathology.
Anatomic and clinical pathology of organ system human disease with an emphasis on integration with clinical medicine. Topics include pulmonary pathology, cardiovascular pathology, hematopatology, oncologic pathology, and nephropathology.
Anatomic and clinical pathology of organ system human disease with emphasis on integration with clinical medicine. Content parallels concurrent clinical courses with integration of lectures and discussions. Topics include gastrointestinal and gynecologic pathology, hepatopathology, oncologic pathology and musculoskeletal pathology.
Four-week course is designed to give the third-year medical student an exposure to the diverse roles that pathologists have in clinical patient care.
Provide future clinicians and scientists with basic clinical and bioengineering laboratory skills to prepare for careers in translational research
Anatomic pathology with an emphasis on autopsy and surgical pathology with application to clinical practice. Specimen grossing, frozen sections, microscopic sign-out and conferences. Exposure to cytopathology, hematopathology, and clinical pathology is available.  
Emphasis upon laboratory techniques, procedures, and interpretation of laboratory results.  Students will be expected to participate fully and in all laboratory operations including bench techniques, laboratory management, and quality control.  
Externship provides in-depth exposure to one of a variety of sub-specialties in Pathology.  
Anatomic Pathology AI will permit students to gain skills needed for first year Pathology Residency. Students will perform autopsies and take full responsibility for a variety of surgical pathology cases. A mix of outpatient and inpatient cases is expected.  
Year four level course designed to provide a concentrated experience in Surgical Pathology and Cytolopathology. Rotate on the surgical and cytopathology sub-specialty teams and assume responsibility for patient cases.
In-depth study of gastrointestinal, hepatic and pancreatic cancer. Emphasis on an integration of basic science and clinical medicine. Participating departments include pathology, surgical oncology, medical oncology, gastroenterology, radiology and radiotherapy. 
Assist instructor by tutoring medical students in preparation for one of the departmental courses that is a component of the required curriculum of the School of Medicine.
Group study in variety of advanced topics in general, special, experimental, or comparative pathology.
Research in experimental, molecular, comparative, and applied pathology.

Overview of immunology including components of the immune system, initiation and regulation of the immune response, infection and immunity, hypersensitivity and immune dysfunction.  Clinical immunologic techniques, immunodeficiency, and vaccinology.
Laboratory procedures in clinical immunology. Cells of the innate and adaptive systems. Quantitative and qualitative characterization of the immune response.  
Introduction to the bacterial and mycotic pathogens of man and animals, with emphasis on pathogenic mechanisms and ecologic aspects of infectious disease.
Introduction to the bacterial and mycotic pathogens of man and animals, with emphasis on pathogenic mechanisms and ecologic aspects of infectious disease. 
Fundamental physical and chemical properties of animal viruses; methods of propagation, purification and assay.  Mechanisms of viral replication and pathogenesis of viral infections in man and animals. Immunity to virus diseases and oncogenic properties of animal viruses.

Introduction to key components of graduate school success including mentor/mentee relationship issues, avoiding plagiarism, hypothesis development and experimental design, demystifying the grant writing process, understanding the NIH administrative structure, preparing for a non-academic career, and strategies to maintain a work-life balance.
Follows two required core courses, PMI 201 & PMI 202, for Ph.D. and M.S. students. Goal is to bridge gap between statistics and real-world pathobiology to increase students' skills and independence in experiment design and data analysis. 
Drafting a scientific manuscript for publication based on research results. Students engage in collaborative peer review and learn effective writing, including how to convey a persuasive message and write clearly and succinctly.
Vector-borne infectious diseases especially as they relate to changing patterns associated with climatic changes, trade and population movement.
Discussion-based seminar covering graduate student virology research. Informal presentations and discussion of technical problems in research design and experimentation are encouraged. Current stage of the research project is not important. 
Current concepts of immunology with an emphasis on interactions between the host, the environment and the pathogen. These interactions will include those that are protective and successful for the host as well as those that are deleterious.
Topics in pathology, microbiology or immunology.
Discussion of current topics and cases of infectious diseases.
Group study.  




Improve the physical and mental health of participating students while supplementing their medical education with specific concepts. 
Improve the physical and mental health of participating students while supplementing their medical education with specific concepts. 
Improve the physical and mental health of participating students while supplementing their medical education with specific concepts. 
Rehabilitation and comprehensive care of physically disabled and physical medicine management of neurologic, neuromuscular and musculoskeletal disorders.  Emphasis on evaluation and conservative treatment of spinal disorders, sports injuries and neuromuscular disease.  Emphasis on inpatient rehabilitation, pediatrics, spine or sports possible.  
Four-week rotation designed as broad overview of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation practice for students interested in residency training in the specialty. Emphasis on evaluation and conservative treatment of spinal disorders, sports injuries, neuromuscular disease, neurological and non-operative orthopedic problems requiring rehabilitative management.
Emphasis on evaluation of patients with neurological or orthopaedic problems requiring rehabilitative techniques for their management. Introduction to management of such patients. Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation at off-campus facility must be approved by Chairperson.
AI Externship option for PM&R rotations at other institutions. 
This four-week module will review the anatomy and biomechanics of the musculoskeletal system as well as its associated pathology. The students will be instructed on appropriate musculoskeletal exam techniques and logical approach to the patient in the clinical setting. 
Study and experience for medical students in any of a number of areas in physical medicine and rehabilitation.
Research on any of a variety of topics in physical medicine and rehabilitation.
Examines fundamental issues and concepts that shape the study and practice of politics. Students will read, discuss and write about some of the most significant texts in political science in order to develop a foundation for the study of politics.

Politics and government of local communities in the United States, including cities, counties and special districts. Emphasizes sources and varieties of community conflict, legislative and executive patterns, expertise, decision making and the politics of structure. Observation of local governing boards.
Political and economic relationships among central cities, suburbs, andregional, state, and federal governments. Focuses upon policy areas such as poverty, transportation, welfare, and housing, and upon who governs and who benefits from the policies in these areas.
California political system. Political culture, constitution, elections and parties, direct democracy, legislature, governor, executive branch, courts, finances, state-local relations and policy issues.
Legislative process with emphasis on the United States Congress; legislative organization and procedures, legislative leadership and policy making, legislators and constituents, relations between Congress and other agencies.
American presidencies origins and development; presidential power and influence as manifest in relationships with Congress, courts, parties, and the public in the formulation and administration of foreign and domestic policy; nominations, campaigns, and elections.
Environment as a political issue in the United States. Development of administrative mechanisms for handling environmental problems. Changing role of Congress, the presidency, the bureaucracy and the courts in environmental policy formulation and implementation.
Theoretical rationale for governmental activity, program evaluation, PPBS, positive theories of policy making, the quantitative study of policy determinants, implementation, and proposals for improved decision making.
Processes of formulating public policy, including individual and collective decision making, political exchange, competition, bargaining, coalition formation and the allocation of public goods, resources and opportunities.
Introduction to game theory. Explanation of the behavior of individuals in strategic interaction. Rational and behavioral approaches. Applications to political science and other fields.
Major contemporary attempts to reformulate traditional democratic theory, attempts to replace traditional theory by conceptual models derived from modern social science findings.
Origins and nature of American political thought. Principles of American thought as they emerge from the founding period to the present.
Logic and methods of analyzing quantitative political data. Topics covered include central tendency, probability, correlation, and non-parametric statistics. Particular emphasis will be placed on understanding the use of statistics in political science research.
Examination of the ideas central to medieval political thinking. Emphasis will be upon the thoughts of the major political thinkers of the period, rather than upon political history.
Analysis and evaluation of the seminal works of a major political philosopher or of a major problem in political philosophy.
Political thought of a specific historical period. Topics may include: Ancient Athens, the Italian Renaissance, the Enlightenment, or 19th-century Germany.
Critical analyses of classical and medieval political philosophers such as Plato, Aristotle, Cicero and St. Thomas.
Critical analysis of the works of early modern political philosophers such as Machiavelli, Montaigne, Hobbes, Locke and Hume.
Critical analyses of the works of late modern political philosophers such as Rousseau, Kant, Hegel, Tocqueville, Mill, Marx and Nietzsche.
Contemporary political thought from the end of the 19th century to the present. Emphasis upon an individual philosopher, concept, or philosophical movement; e.g., Nietzsche, Continental political thought, Rawls and critics, theories of distributive justice, feminist theory.
Major contemporary approaches to the study of international politics, including balance of power, game theory, Marxist-Leninist theory, systems theory, and decision-making analysis.
Analysis of political processes involved in the initiation, conduct and termination of modern interstate warfare.
Selected topics in international law; territory, sovereign immunity,responsibility, the peaceful settlement or nonsettlement of international disputes.
In the past several decades, growing economic interdependence has generated new problems in international relations. Deals with difficulties in managing complex interdependence and its implication on national policies and politics.
Analysis of current economic and political international relations resulting from a long standing division of the global system into rich and poor regions. 
Compares the claims of the state and ethnic peoples in countries undergoing internal conflicts; e.g., South Africa, Northern Ireland. Analyzes the role of the international community in facilitating the peaceful resolution of conflicts.
Intensive examination of one or more special problems in international politics. May be taught abroad.
Broad survey of the development of U.S. foreign policy in 20th century with emphasis on transformation of policy during and after World War II, and the introduction to analytic tools and concepts useful for understanding of current foreign policy issues.
Detailed presentation and examination of the formulation of execution of U.S. foreign policy. Survey of numerous factors influencing policy outcomes and how such determinants vary according to policy issue areas.
Development of national security policies since 1945. Analysis of deterrence and assumptions upon which it is based. Effects of nuclear weapons upon conduct of war, alliance systems, and the international system. Prospects of security and stability through arms control.
Overview of American foreign policy toward Africa. Relationship to global adversaries. Legacies of colonialism. Challenge of national self-determination and white racism. Policies on non-alignment, producer cartels, multinational corporations, continental integration and trade and aid relations.
International politics of the Middle East as a microcosm of world politics. The Middle East as a regional system. Domestic and International Politics in the Middle East. Changing Political Structures in the Middle East. Superpower involvement in the Middle East.
Causes, course, and implications of Arab-Israeli conflict. Competing Israeli and Arab narratives, politics of force, diplomacy. Domestic politics and A-I conflict, the superpowers and the A-I conflict, A-I conflict and world politics, potential solutions.
Analysis of European unity, problems of the Atlantic alliance, Atlantic political economy, East-West relations, communism in Western Europe and the relationship between domestic politics and foreign policy. May be taught abroad.
Extensive examination of one or more special problems in foreign policy. 
Workings of electoral institutions, focusing on systems used to elect presidents and assemblies, pass laws, and generally make decisions. Examples from systems throughout the world, including cases from both the advanced industrial and developing worlds.
Factors shaping political parties and their role in democratic representation.
Examination of legislatures from a comparative perspective.
Examination of factors contributing to the success and failure of political institutions.
Comparative analysis of policy-making in the U.S. and other countries. 
Nature and sequence of political development; its economic and social concomitants; role of elites, military, bureaucracy, and party systems; social stratification and group politics; social mobilization and political participation; instability, violence, and the politics of integration.
Linkages between politics and the distribution of social and economic goods. Impact of civil rights legislation, the politics of welfare states, and the effects of political participation on the distribution of goods.
Examination of conditions promoting democratization and democratic stability.
Issues related to democratic consolidation in Latin America, with a regional focus on South America. Topics include transitions to democracy, the role of the military, political economy, and political behavior.  
Introduction to the politics of contemporary Mexico. Focus on rise, fall, and aftermath of Mexico's one-party dominant system.   
Post-war democratization, state-building and economic reform in East European states.  
Democratization, state-building and economic reform; creation of new institutions; impacts of Soviet rule.
African politics since the end of the Cold War. Topics include: Strategic Security Approach, Democratization, Human Rights, HIV/AIDS, African Peacekeeping, Terrorism, Religious and Ethnic Conflict, Debt and Stalled Development.
Political and economic development within Sub-Saharan Africa. States and institutions, democracy, party systems, military coups/rule, bureaucracy/corruption, race/ethnicity, national/regional integrations, trade unions, economic development strategies, class formation, and women's roles and ideology.
Evolution, politics, and contemporary problems of selected political systems of Western Europe. May be taught abroad.
Evolution, politics, and contemporary problems of Britain's political system.
Evolution, politics and contemporary problems of France's political system.
Evolution, politics and contemporary problems of Germany's political system.
Evolution of political institutions and political culture in China with emphasis on the post-1949 period. Primary attention to nationalism, modernization and political efficacy.
Japanese politics, with an emphasis on the postwar period. Particular emphasis on political parties, elections, political economy, and social problems.
Evolution of political institutions and economy of selected nations in Southeast Asia. Emphasis on imperialist legacy, nation building in multi-ethnic communities, and contrasts in economic performance.
Politics of judicial policy making, issues surrounding constitutional interpretation and decision making, prerequisite for courses on the politics of constitutional law.
Constitutional politics surrounding such issues as the right to free expression, associational rights, the right to free exercise of religious beliefs and the right to privacy.
Constitutional politics of equality in the American political system; issues surrounding constitutional doctrine and judicial policymaking; special attention on racial and sexual equality.
Constitutional politics of the American criminal justice system. Issues surrounding constitutional doctrine and judicial policymaking on issues such as search and seizure. Arrest, trial, incarceration and other issues of due process.
Analysis of the nature and functions of law; law as an instrument of social control and the relationship between law and morality.  
Analysis of the behavior of judges and courts in the political process. Techniques of judicial decision making. Relationships among courts and other decision-making bodies.
Analysis of the structured operations of the party system in the United States; party functions and organizations, nomination processes, campaigns and elections, party trends and reforms.
Analysis of American elections and partisan behavior; political socialization, political participation, partisanship and individual and group determinants of voting.
Groups, institutions and individuals, especially in American politics. Historical and analytical treatment of group theories as applied to interest groups (especially labor, business, agriculture, science, military); to racial, ethnic and sectional groups; to parties, public and legislative groups, bureaucracies.
Nature of public opinion in America as it is supposed to be and as it is. Distribution of opinions among different publics and the significance of that distribution for system stability and institutions. Opinion polling and its problems.
Organization of and decision making within the media; media audiences and the effect of the media on attitudes and behavior; the relationship of the government to the media (censorship, secrecy, freedom of the press, government regulation);the media in election campaigns.
Role of women in American politics. Historical experiences; contemporary organizations and strategies; areas of legislative concern; the impact of differences in social class, race, and ethnicity upon the involvement of women in politics.
Political aspects of Chicano life in America; examines the Chicano's political role as it has been historically defined by different groups in society and the Chicano's responses to his/her political environment.
Overview to the growing literature on political psychology. Introduction to how psychological concepts (personality, attitudes, stereotypes, heuristics, affect, identity, group dynamics) help us understand how citizens think about politics.
Nature and performance of political processes for making energy choices at the international, national and state levels. Interaction of energy policy with other political goals and the ability of governmental institutions to overcome constraints on policy innovation.
Systematic analysis of contemporary issues in American political development: historical determinants of political change; the timing and character of institutional development; conditions for successful political action. Democratization, cultural change, party formation, state-building, constitutionalism, race relations.
Political basis of economic policy (taxation, spending and regulation); impact of prices, employment and growth on political demands; elite responses to economic conditions; policy alternatives and the public interest.
Analysis of policymaking for science and the use of scientific expertise for making decisions about technology. Topics include funding of basic research, relationship of science to technological development, science and military policy, technological risks, technology assessment and scientists and politics.
Race, racial attitudes and racial policies in the United States with a specific emphasis on African Americans.
Intensive examination of one or more special problems appropriate to comparative politics. Coverage is given to formal and informal political institutions, economically developing and developed countries, and non-democratic, democratic, and democratizing countries.
Role of bureaucracy in a complex society, with emphasis upon changing relationships between government and the economy; consequences of rapid technological and social change for bureaucratic structures and processes; the problems of reconciling expertise and democracy and increasing the responsiveness of public bureaucracy.
Implications for American public administration of evolving concepts about behavior in organizations.
Historical and critical analysis of the principal theories of organization and management of public agencies in light of such concepts as decision making, bureaucracy, authority and power, communication and control; examination of role of government bureaucracies in the total society.
Analysis and evaluation of substantive issues in contemporary international relations. Readings drawn from current academic and non-academic periodicals. May be taught abroad.
Supervised internship and study in political, governmental, or related organizations.
Supervised internship and study in political, governmental, or related organizations.
Supervised preparation of an extensive paper relating internship experience to concepts, literature, and theory of political science.
Core academic component of Washington Program.  Topics coordinated with internships.  Research draws on resources uniquely available in Washington, DC.  Supervised preparation of extensive paper.
Directed reading, research and writing culminating in preparation of a senior honors thesis under the direction of faculty advisor.
Directed reading, research and writing culminating in preparation of a senior honors thesis under the direction of faculty advisor.
Intensive examination of one or more special problems appropriate toAmerican politics.
Intensive reading, discussion, research, writing in American politics. Topics may include Congress, the Presidency, the Supreme Court, federalism, voting behavior, interest groups, ethnic groups or other topics with a more specialized content than normal course offerings.
Intensive reading, discussion, research, writing in comparative politics. Topics may include one country or geographical area, political institutions or behavior across countries, political development, or other topics that are more specialized than normal course offerings.
Intensive reading, discussion, research, writing in international relations including study of international political institutions (UN, EU, or NATO) or interstate relations (war, trade, immigration) and other topics with more specialized content than normal course offerings. 
Intensive reading, discussion, research, writing in political theory. Topics may include study of a single political thinker, a group of related thinkers, development of political concepts, or other topics with more specialized content than normal course offerings.
Intensive reading, discussion, research, and writing in selected topics in Research Methods such as research design, statistics, game theory, etc.

Introduction to philosophy of science and research design for political science. Topics include: logic of empirical research, overview of research design approaches for political science research.
Introductory seminar on the foundations of probability theory and mathematical statistics that are critical to empirical investigations in political science.
Seminar provides an introduction to the linear regression model. Will obtain a working knowledge of basic regression techniques and problems.
More advanced topics in the use of statistical methods, with emphasis on political applications. Topics include: properties of least squares estimates, problems in multiple regression, and advanced topics (probit analysis, simultaneous models, time-series analysis, etc.).
Research seminar sequence required of all PhD students. Design, execution, and defense of an original piece of research in political science, culminating in a paper of publishable quality.  
Research seminar sequence required of all PhD students. Design, execution, and defense of an original piece of research in political science, culminating in a paper of publishable quality.  
Introduction to formal and game theoretic analyses of politics. Students will learn basic game theory and modeling skills. We examine the benefits of modeling, and look at examples of formal analysis in a variety of political science sub-fields.
Introduction to political theory and current debates over its study. Readings from and textual interpretations of political theory including the Federalist Papers and major works by thinkers such as Plato, Aristotle, Machiavelli, Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, and Rawls. Other readings addressing issues of textual interpretation.
Systematic analysis of selected topics dealing with the political process of communist political systems.
Systematic survey of theories and methods used in the study of comparative politics.
Included in an analysis of policymaking process in Third-World countries are such topics as political resources, institutional resources, decision making, resource allocations, planning, and budgeting, implementation, and distribution of world resources.
Thorough overview of the literature regarding courts as policymaking institutions of government, with emphasis on the formation and implementation of judicial policy. Differences and similarities across the judicial, congressional, and executive branch policy processes.
Structure of political networks, socio-matrices and affiliation networks; general networks characteristics: density, centralization, polarization, interdependence, dyadic and triadic characteristics: structural and role equivalence; subsets of networks: cliques, blocks and bloc modeling; characteristics of individuals in networks: centrality and prestige.
Methodology seminar introducing Bayesian quantitative methods to issues and problems in political science and other social and behavioral sciences.
Methodology seminar introducing computing issues in empirical models for political science and other social and behavioral sciences.
Applications of formal theory to political science. Review of relevant contributions in other social sciences. Consideration of advanced techniques in game theory. Rational and behavioral approaches.  
Exponential Random Graph Models (ERGMS) of networks, game theoretic models of network formation and network dynamics, diffusion processes, shocks and network collapse, percolation, cross-network spillover processes, social and political applications of advanced network models.
Special research seminar on problems and issues in the study of American government and public policy.
Contemporary research on judicial politics, judicial institutions, jurisprudence, and judicial behavior.
Special research seminar on selected problems and issues in methods in political science.
Application and evaluation of theoretical concepts through work experience or systematic observation in public and political agencies.
Methods and problems of teaching political science at the undergraduatelevel.

Continuation of POR 001 in the areas of grammar and development of all basic language skills in cultural context with special emphasis on communication.
Continuation of POR 002 in the areas of grammar and development of all basic language skills in cultural context with special emphasis on communication.
Designed to develop oral communication skills. Emphasis on increasing vocabulary, improving listening comprehension, pronunciation, accuracy and grammar control. Practice of everyday situations.
Review and develop the grammar, vocabulary, and composition acquired in first year Portuguese through exercises and reading of modern texts. 
Continuation of POR 021. Focus on more difficult grammar concepts and further composition practice. Development of all language skills through exercises and reading of modern texts.
Development of writing skills by way of reading, discussion, and analysis of authentic materials, literary texts, and videos. Selective review of grammar. Class activities include composition, journals, letters, individual and group projects.
Continuation of POR 008. Designed to develop oral communication skills at a more advanced level. Practice in more complex situations.
Directed group study primarily for lower division students.
Principles of literary criticism applied to the study of fiction, poetry, and essays of major literary writers of the Luso-Brazilian world.
Linguistic description of sound patterns of Portuguese and how those sounds can be used to form larger units, such as morphemes and words. Theoretical and practical comparisons with English and with other Romance languages.
Overview of Luso-Brazilian literature, covering three major literary periods: Renaissance, Baroque, and Enlightenment. Attention to the concept of imitation and nativism.
Overview of the origins of the Portuguese literature, spanning from the 13th century to the 16th century. Studies of lyrical and epic poetry, drama, and travel narratives.
Overview of the greatest Renaissance Portuguese poet, Luis de Cames.  Study his famous epic poem, Os Lusiadas, and a series of sonnets written by him.
Introduction to history, geography, and culture of Portugal and Brazil. Art, history of ideas, and everyday cultural manifestations. Introduction to critical reading and textual analysis. Taught in Portuguese.
Special topics in the study of Luso-Brazilian literature and culture.
Colonial Brazilian literature survey. Readings include 16th-18th centuries manuscripts and books of cultural importance in a society dominated by censorship and with no printing presses. Study of the role literary Academies played in the so called "culture of manuscripts." 
Narrative and poetic texts of the 19th and 20th centuries in Brazil. In-depth and comparative study of Romantic and (Neo)Naturalist movements as a forum for discussion about literary tradition and modernity in Latin America.
Overview of modern Brazilian literature from early 20th C to the poetry by Joo Cabral de Melo Neto and the Concretists (1960s), including European avant-garde movements and literary and cultural manifestos leading to a revolutionary body of literature.

Instructor will acquaint students with his or her program of research, the development of scientific questions from the literature, and the application of research methods to examine these questions. Criticalthinking will be encouraged via expository writing and brief presentations.
Introduction to experimental design, interviews, questionnaires, field and observational methods, reliability, and statistical inference.
Evolutionary perspectives on attraction and close relationships. Integrating social psychological and evolutionary theories with empirical evidence pertaining to human mating.
Psychological perspectives on the process of understanding other peoples minds. Integration of social-cognitive theories with empirical evidence to explore the human ability to make sense of others' thoughts, feelings, and behaviors.
Examination of a special topic in Psychology through shared readings, discussions, written assignments, or special activities such as fieldwork or laboratory work. 
Introduction to human information processing, mental representation and transformation, imagery, attention, memory, language processing, concept formation, problem solving, and computer simulation.
Introduction to human information processing, mental representation and transformation, imagery, attention, memory, language processing, concept formation, problem solving, and computer simulation. 
Survey and integration of the relationships between behavior and biological processes, including physiology, genes, development, ecology, and evolution.
Design and statistical analysis of psychological investigations and the interpretation of quantitative data in psychology.
Probability theory, sampling distributions, statistical inference, and hypothesis testing using standard parametric and correlational approaches. Simple regression analysis, multiple regression analysis, non-parametric statistics, introduction to multivariate statistics, with applications in psychology.
Examination of the basic principles and applications of classical and modern test theory. Topics include test construction, reliability theory, validity theory, factor analysis and latent trait theory.
Introduction to survey and questionnaire research methods with emphasis on how to ask questions. Social and psychological factors that influence survey response. Practical aspects of fielding survey and questionnaire research.
The biology of behavioral development; survey and integration of the organismic and environmental processes that regulate the development of behavior.
Introduction to agent-based computer simulation and analysis with emphasis on learning how to model animals, including humans, to achieve insight into social and group behavior.
Relationship of brain structure and function to behavior, motivation, emotion, language, and learning in humans and other animals. An introduction to the methodology of physiological psychology and neuroscience. 
Advanced integrative survey of biological principles of behavioral organization, emphasizing historical roots, current research directions, conceptual issues and controversies. Laboratory exercises on the description and analysis of the behavior of captive and free-living animals 
Endocrine physiology with an emphasis on the principles of behavior. Fundamental relationships between hormones and various behaviors engaged in by the organism during its lifetime. Role of hormones in behavioral homeostasis, social behavior, reproductive behavior, parental behavior, adaptation to stress. 
Overview of the neuroanatomy in mammalian vertebrates, focusing on the cerebral cortex and experimental techniques. Examine changes or modifications to neural structures as a result of morphological or behavioral specializations.
Comparative neuroanatomy laboratory illustrating modern neuroanatomical techniques in determining neural connections within the mammalian brain. Includes experimentation and presentation of results.
Review of basic principles in genetics and epigenetics with emphasis on behavior. Introduction to the use of modern molecular methods in understanding the complex relationships between genes, environment, and behavior. 
Psychological factors influencing health and illness. Topics include stress and coping, personality and health, symptom perception and reporting, heart disease, cancer, compliance, and health maintenance and promotion. 
Consideration of major theories of human learning and memory with critical examination of relevant experimental data.
Cognitive organizations related to measurable physical energy changes mediated through sensory channels. Perception of objects, space, motion, events.
Introduction to the cognitive processes involved in language comprehension and production. Topics include the biological foundations of language, speech perception, word recognition, syntax, reading ability, and pragmatics.
Theoretical and empirical approaches to neuroeconomics (neuroscience of decision making) from psychology, neuroscience, economics, and computer science. Neuroscience of judgment and decision making, behavioral economics, and reinforcement learning.
Neuroscientific foundations of higher mental processes including attention, memory, language, higher-level perceptual and motor processes, and consciousness. Emphasis on the neural mechanisms which form the substrates of human cognition and the relationship of mind to brain. May be taught abroad.
Introduction to the mental and neural representations of musical structures and processes involved in perceiving, remembering, and performing music. Music and emotion.
Overview of the neural basis of learning and memory focusing on modern behavioral  neuroscience research with animals. Topics include consolidation, neural plasticity, cellular competition for memory storage, and the role of neurogenesis in learning.
Current theoretical and empirical evidence in the study of cognition and consciousness. Theories of consciousness, psychological and neural basis of conscious and unconscious processes such as attention, intentionality, and dreams.
Advanced integrative survey of cognitive neuroscience, including perception, attention, memory, and navigation. Emphasis on reviewing literature in psychology, neuroscience, and statistics; understanding methods in cognition; and presentation skills.
An ontogenetic account of human behavior through adolescence with emphasis on motor skills, mental abilities, motivation, and social interaction.
Ontogenetic account of human behavior through adolescence with emphasis on motor skills, mental abilities, motivation, and social interaction. 
Theories, methods, evidence, and debates in the field of cognitive development, such as nature/nurture, constraints on learning, and the role of plasticity. Topics include attention, memory, concepts about the physical and social world, and language.
Social and personality development of children, infancy through adolescence. Topics include the development of personality, achievement motivation, self-understanding, sex-role identity, and antisocial behavior. Emphasis on the interface between biological and social factors.
Psychological development in infancy. Topics include physical and motor development, sensory and nervous system development, and memory and cognitive development. Emphasis will be  on evaluating theories, empirical research, and experimental methods for understanding infant development.
Neuroscientific theories and methods (EEG, ERP, fNIRS, fMRI) that inform an understanding of behavioral and cognitive development over infancy and childhood. Neurodevelopmental correlates of perception, action, language, and social cognition; value of the neuroscientific perspective; limitations and challenges of neuroscientific research in the developmental context.
Theory and research on memory development with focus on infancy and childhood. 
Current scientific knowledge of the influences of biological, cognitive, and environmental factors on the emergence of disorders with onset in childhood.  Examples include autism spectrum, ADD/ADHD, dyslexia and dyscalculia.  Emphasis placed on understanding these disorders, their causes and their treatments.
Behavior of the individual in the group. Examination of basic psychological processes in social situations, surveying various problems of social interaction: group tensions, norm-development, attitudes, values, public opinion, status. 
Examines how social factors influence how we attend to, encode, and process information and how these mental processes affect subsequent judgments and behavior. 
Current theoretical and empirical issues in the study of psychology and law. Topics include eyewitness testimony, child abuse, jury decision making, juvenile delinquency and criminology, prediction of violence, insanity defense, and memory for traumatic events.
Introduction to current theories and research on emotion and bodily feelings with special reference to self-knowledge. 
Social psychological underpinnings of stereotyping, prejudice, and stigma from sociocultural, motivational, and cognitive perspectives. Topics include: origins, maintenance, change, effects on person perception and memory, and the automaticity/controllability of stereotyping and prejudice.
Current scientific knowledge about sexual orientation and prejudice based on sexual orientation. Emphasis is placed on learning the skills necessary for a critical understanding of science and public policy issues relevant to sexuality.
Psychology of reproduction. Reproductive events over the course of an individuals life, including sexual development, mate choice, relationships, and reproduction. Biological and social psychological explanations at the levels of mechanism and evolutionary function.
Psychological theory and research on the self. Topics include: self-knowledge, self-esteem, self-regulation, self-presentation, cognitive and emotional aspects of the self, and the role of the self in shaping social interaction. 
Scientific study of personality. Methods of personality research. Overview of current research and theory in the field of personality psychology. May be taught abroad.
Major theoretical formulations in the history of clinical psychology, from classical psychoanalysis to contemporary existentialism and behavior modification. A survey, based on lectures, films, and tapes, of what clinical psychologists do, including methods of appraisal, professional roles,and approaches to treatment.
Major theoretical formulations in the history of clinical psychology, from classical psychoanalysis to contemporary existentialism and behavior modification. Survey based on lectures, films, and tapes, of what clinical psychologists do, including methods of appraisal, professional roles, and approaches to treatment.
Descriptive and functional account of behavioral disorders, with primary consideration given to neurotic and psychotic behavior.
Major theories, issues, data, and research methodologies of the psychology of religion. Religious experience and expression; religious development in childhood, adolescence, and adulthood; conversion; religious influences on physical and mental health; cross-cultural perspectives.
Phenomenon of genius is examined from a diversity of theoretical, methodological, and disciplinary perspectives, with an emphasis on outstanding creativity and leadership in art, music, literature, philosophy, science, war, and politics.
Empirical research on selected topics in general experimental psychology (general research design and analysis, perception, cognition, cognitive development, etc.). Specific content will vary from quarter to quarter.
Empirical research on selected topics in psychobiology (animal learning, animal behavior, physiological and sensory psychology, developmental psychobiology, computer modeling of neural systems). Content varies.
Empirical research on selected topics in personality and social psychology (personality, social psychology, organizational psychology, etc.). Content will vary from quarter to quarter.
Empirical research on selected topics in developmental psychology (research design and analysis, development, cognitive development, social and personality development etc.). 
Training in specific lab-based research methods coupled with hands-on experience in a research lab. Students assessed on their ability report and interpret research findings. Content varies from quarter to quarter.
Development of psychological thought and research in context of history of philosophy and science.
Intensive treatment of a special topic or problem of psychological interest. 
In-depth examination at an upper division level of a special topic in Psychology. Emphasis on student participation in learning. May not be repeated for credit.
Supervised internship off and on campus, in community and institutional settings. Maximum of 6 units may be used towards satisfaction of upper division major requirement.
Directed research. Supervised reading, research and writing leading to submission of a Senior Honors thesis under the direction of faculty sponsor.
Directed research. Supervised reading, research and writing leading to submission of a Senior Honors thesis under the direction of faculty sponsor.
Intended for advanced undergraduate students who will lead discussion sections in Psychology courses. 
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.
Introduces matriculating graduate students to research activities of departmental faculty.

Presentation of graduate research to program faculty and graduate students.
Probability theory, sampling distributions, statistical inference, and hypothesis testing using standard parametric and correlational approaches. Analysis of variance, factorial and repeated measures, and tests of trends.
Examination of how to make causal inferences from correlational data in the behavioral sciences. Emphasis is on testing rival causal models using correlations among observed variables. Beginning with multiple regression analysis, discussion advances to path analysis and related techniques.
Advanced topics in statistical inference, which may include probability theory, sampling distributions, statistical inference and hypothesis testing, nonparametric statistics, Bayesian approaches, and advanced issues in analysis of variance.
Review of the major methods of multivariate data analysis for psychological data.  Students will program statistical routines using a linear algebra-based computing language.  Topics will include multivariate analysis of variance. discriminant analysis, canonical analysis factor analysis, and component analysis.
Theory and methods of factor analysis, including exploratory factor analysis, confirmatory factor analysis, and principal component analysis.
Theory and methods of structural equation modeling, including path analysis, confirmatory factor analysis, multiple-group modeling and latent growth curve modeling.
Introduction to statistical techniques for the analysis of normal, hierarchically structured data, such as cross-sectional clustered data or repeated-measures data.  Topics include hierarchical linear models, latent growth curve models, and how these methods handle unbalanced and/or missing data.
Examination of the basic principles and applications of classical and modern test theory. Topics include test construction, reliability theory, validity theory, factor analysis, and latent trait theory.
Item response theory allows for the creation of precise measurement instruments in psychological testing. Review Classical Test Theory, and then cover basic IRT models through advanced applications.
Modeling and understanding of intraindividual change and interindividual differences in change. Reviews conventional methods and introduces contemporary techniques for modeling intraindividual change. 
Survey and questionnaire research methods with emphasis on how to ask questions. Cognitive, motivational, and social processes that influence how respondents answer questions; sampling techniques; internet resources; practical aspects of fielding survey and questionnaire research. 
A conceptual analysis of the contributions of neuroanatomy, neurophysiology and neurochemistry to an understanding of animal and human behavior.
In-depth introduction and hands-on experience with the event-related potential (ERP) method in the study of attention, executive control, memory, language and social cognitive neuroscience. 
The Matlab programming environment as a means of organizing, analyzing, and visualizing scientific data.  Basic programming concepts such as variables, loops, conditional branching, and efficient programming techniques will be emphasized.
Introduction to empirical foundations and methodology of neuroimaging, emphasizing pragmatics of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to study cognition. Topics include MR physics, the relationship between neural activity and the BOLD response, experimental design, and analysis of fMRI data. 
Critical presentation and discussion of the most influential advanced issues in neuroimaging, emphasizing fMRI design/analysis and the integration of fMRI with EEG/MEG.
Theories and empirical findings concerning human cognitive and perceptual development. Development of perception, memory, concepts (e.g., theory of mind, concepts about number), problem solving, and language from infancy to adolescence.
Theories and empirical findings concerning human social, emotional, and personality development. Development of emotions, moral reasoning and behavior, personality, self-concept, and social cognition from infancy to adolescence (may include adulthood).
Review basic principles in genetics and select topics in molecular genetics with emphasis on behavior. Use of modern molecular methods to outline complex relationships between genes, environment, and behavior.  
Survey of the phenomena and theory of animal behavior from the perspectives of multiple biological disciplines, including evolution, ecology, psychology, genetics, neurobiology, endocrinology, and animal science. 
Survey of the phenomena and theory of animal behavior from the 
A lecture-seminar on the history of psychology and on the applicability of early psychological theory and research to contemporary investigations.
Strategies for developing and honing academic writing skills and writing productivity, with a particular focus on how to write a clear and compelling empirical journal article in psychology.
Analysis of the mental processes by which knowledge is acquired, manipulated, stored, retrieved and used.
Analysis of the role of sensory processes and perception in experience and their effects on behavior.
Survey of theory and research in the field of attitudes and social influence. Topics include attitude definition and measurement, major theories of attitude formation and change, the relationship between attitudes and behavior, and recent directions and controversies.
Social psychological theory and research on attraction and close relationships, with a particular emphasis on romantic relationships. Covers attachment theory, interdependence theory, and evolutionary psychological perspectives.
Theory and research in social psychology.
Theory and research in human personality.
Theory and experiment in the genetic contributions to animal and human behavior.
Critical study in a selected area of psychobiology.
Graduate core course for neuroscience. Neurobiological bases of higher mental function including attention, memory, language. One of three in three-quarter sequence.
Selected topics in language processing, memory, perception, problem solving, and thinking, with an emphasis on the common underlying cognitive processes.
Discussion of fundamental issues in the psychology of language.
Critical study of a selected area of personality or social psychology.    
Core concepts and methods used in studies of learning, memory and plasticity. Behavioral paradigms and measurement approaches in human and animal studies of learning and plasticity, as well as a consideration of the functional, anatomical and neuronal mechanisms underlying brain plasticity. 
Core concepts and detailed survey methods used in studies of learning, memory and plasticity, from the cellular and molecular level to the level of neural circuits. Areas of learning, memory, and plasticity research where recent progress has been made in linking across these levels of analysis.
Neurological disorders, the effect of these disorders on learning, memory and plasticity, approved therapeutic options and current research designed to improve understanding and treatment of these diseases: (i) the clinical presentation, diagnostic criteria, and existing therapies, (ii) mechanistic studies in humans and animal models, and (iii) molecular pathways involved in the disease and approaches for drug discovery.
Selected topics in developmental psychology, including developmental  neuroscience, memory development, infancy, cognitive development, social development, child maltreatment, children and law, perceptual development, emotional development, children at risk, and adolescence, with emphasis on developmental processes and developmental theory. 
Contemporary theory and empirical research in specialized topics in psychology. Topics include developmental attachment, social neuroscience, mental health, emotion, sexual orientation and identity.
Intensive examination of contemporary theory and empirical research on a specialized topic in psychology. Sample topics include developmental attachment, social neuroscience, culture and mental health, electrophysiology and cognitive neuroscience, emotion, implicit cognitive processes, sexual orientation and identity, and attention. 
Seminar devoted to a highly specific research topic in any area of basic psychology. Special topic selected for a quarter will vary depending on interests of instructor and students.

Methods and techniques of teaching undergraduate psychology. Integration of learning outcomes with effective evaluation. Practical experience in the application of pedagogical principles.
Methods and problems of teaching psychology at the undergraduate and graduate levels; curriculum design and evaluation. Practical experience in the preparation and presentation of material.
Methods and problems of teaching psychology at the undergraduate and graduate levels; curriculum design and evaluation. Practical experience in the preparation and presentation of material.
Supervised teaching in undergraduate classrooms. Techniques for delivering content through lectures, discussions, or labs; course administration; communications; assessment of student learning; solving ethical problems; instructional technology.

Total involvement in patient care involving surgical preparation, treatment, operative care, and follow-up. Developing and understanding reconstruction and aesthetic plastic surgery. Microvascular surgery included. Student rotation.
Student run clinic for upper division students interested in learning about and meeting the unique health care needs for the homeless population.




Psychiatric interviewing, Mental Status Exam and diagnosis. Major child and adult disorders, including substance abuse and dependence. Weekly student interviews of psychiatric patients in small group format.
During this "mini-clerkship," fellows will attend clinics, in-patient settings, and clinicians' offices. They will meet weekly to present cases and review current literature, and will complete a summary narrative at the end of their experience.
Year-long mentoring program provides clinical exposure to child and adolescent psychiatric healthcare during a medical student's pre-clinical years.  
Weekly conference at UCDMC for presentation of selected clinical cases,presentation of lecture and research reports.
Experience in clinical management/treatment of adult outpatients with psychiatric and substance abuse disorders; crisis management/intervention, evaluation/development of diagnosis and treatment plan; emphasis on outpatient psychopharmacology/brief psychotherapy; observation of group therapy. Individual supervision by faculty/residents.
A large university hospital service in which the student functions as a member of the team in evaluation, management and psychiatric liaison with other medical specialties. Intensive supervision from senior staff and psychiatric residents. 
Fourth-year medical student elective in Telemedicine focusing on psychiatric issues. Align with University, School and Center for Health and Technology mission of rural outreach and public health, particularly in primary care.
Didactic and clinical inpatient, outpatient, and consultation-liaison experiences with children, adolescents and families. Clinical observations, diagnostic assessment, and treatment will be undertaken with close supervision. Literature review and case conferences presented on a regular basis.
Students gain experience, under close faculty supervision, assessingacute and chronic mentally ill inmates in both inpatient and clinic settings.
Clinical or research elective in off-campus medical school or mental health setting. To be arranged with advance approval of instructor andindividual in charge of off-campus setting.
Acting intern position with close faculty supervision with emphasis on biological psychiatry, psychopharmacology and psychodynamic aspects appropriate to diagnostic and long-term patient management.
Students rotate through the county Primary Care Clinic under the supervision of dual-boarded Psychiatry and Internal Medicine Faculty to provide medical care of indigent and uninsured patients as well as primary care for psychiatry patients.
Student run clinic for medical students interested in learning about and meeting the unique health care needs for the homeless population.
The theory, methods and principles of functional neurogenomics withemphasis on the relationship to molecular mechanisms involved in development and disease of the nervous system.
Assigned to clinical settings, students build upon the skills gained in preclinical years; emphasis on diagnostic, therapeutic and interpersonal skills. Areas of focus - patient management, interviewing skills, mental status exam, differential diagnosis, basic psychopharmacology, crisis assessment, intervention and case
Longitudinal Clerkship runs concurrently with Family Medicine, Pediatrics and Internal Medicine for 32 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. 
Longitudinal Clerkship runs concurrently with Family Medicine, Pediatrics and Internal Medicine for 32 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. 
Longitudinal Clerkship runs concurrently with Family Medicine, Pediatrics and Internal Medicine for 32 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. 
Longitudinal Clerkship runs concurrently with Family Medicine, Pediatrics and Internal Medicine for 32 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. 
Psychiatry Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
Psychiatry Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
Psychiatry Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
Psychiatry Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
Longitudinal Clerkship runs concurrently with Primary Care and Medicine for 24 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. On-going patient write-ups, rounds, conferences are required.
Longitudinal Clerkship runs concurrently with Primary Care and Medicine for 24 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. On-going patient write-ups, rounds, conferences are required.
Longitudinal Clerkship runs concurrently with Primary Care and Medicine for 24 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. On-going patient write-ups, rounds, conferences are required.
Individual directed studies in extended preparation for modified curriculum or to complete a clinical rotation following a leave of absence.
Individual directed studies in extended preparation for remediation of all or part of clinical rotation. Clinical studies to accommodate and satisfy remedial work as directed by the Committee on Student Progress and approved by the course IOR.
On individual basis, student provided with an opportunity for gaininginsight into various clinical activities in the practice of psychiatry.
Inpatient acting internship at approved non-UCDHS affiliated training program that provides experience and preparation for ambulatory medical care.  Students perform as an intern, with a smaller number of patients, greater supervision, and responsibility for the ongoing care of assigned patients.
Outpatient acting internship at an approved non-UCDHS affiliated training program that provides experience and preparation for ambulatory medical care. Students perform as an intern, with smaller number of patients, greater supervision, and responsibility for the ongoing care of assigned patients. 
Learn about the epidemiological significance of health disparities and barriers to access to health care. Covers: (1) Epidemiology/Health Disparities; (2) Society & Medicine; (3) Cinemeducation; (4) Reflection/Integration.
Approved for graduate degree credit. Medical students desiring to explore particular topics in depth.
Approved for graduate degree credit. Individual research on selected topics or research projects.
First of three courses presenting fundamental principles of pharmacology and toxicology. Introductory overview of basic concepts in pharmacology/toxicology, followed by in-depth blocks on fate processes of chemicals in the body, fate processes in tissue selective responses, selective toxicity employed therapeutically.
Second of three courses presenting fundamental principles of pharmacology and toxicology. Principles of pharmacodynamics and mechanisms of drug/toxicant actions.
Integrated physiological systems, cardiovascular and nervous systems and how drugs and toxicants act to perturb function.
In-depth coverage of selected topics for graduate students in Pharmacology-Toxicology and related disciplines. Topics determined by instructor in charge for each quarter.
Exploration of cutting edge investigations on the underlying mechanisms of cancer biology, cancer therapy and other diseases. Current medical research in cancer and other diseases, as it spans the bench to bedside.
Supervised work experience in pulmonary medicine. 
Pulmonary disease research activity with focus in inhalation toxicity, oxidants or lung biochemistry, and cell and molecular biology.
Rotation intended to provide a comprehensive student education in Pulmonary Medicine. Students will participate in hands on clinical education, as well as completing an assigned curricula. Intended for students pursuing Internal Medicine & Primary Care careers.
Rotation intended to provide student education in the Critical Care Management of sub-specialty patients.  
Similar to PUL 460. Rotation designed for students interested in learning pulmonary medicine, but who desire more variety in their clerkships, and do not desire the comprehensive experience offered by a four-week pulmonary rotation.
Work with hospice interdisciplinary team. Direct experience in the care of patients with illnesses where no cure is possible. Emphasis on symptom relief, end of life issues, physician assisted suicide.
Care for critically ill adults with complex medical disease carries with it unique ethical roles and duties for the physician.
Attend respiratory outpatient clinics and in-patient pulmonary consultation rounds and medical intensive care rounds. Introduction to diagnosis and treatment of common pulmonary problems.
Research opportunity in Pulmonary Medicine.
Independent research will be encouraged in basic immunology, including the role of the cellular immune system in oncogenesis.
Supervised work experience in rheumatology-allergy.
Independent research will be encouraged in basic immunology, including the role of the cellular immune system in oncogenesis.
Current developments in various aspects of immunology and their interrelationships. Focus on areas of immunology not currently covered in the basic and advanced immunology courses. Oral presentation, written review and grant preparation.
Library and/or laboratory work as required.
Independent research will be encouraged in both animal models of human disease (including congenitally athymic [nude], asplenic, and New Zealand mice) and the cellular immune system of patients with systemiclupus erythematosus, Sjgrens syndrome, polymyositis and drug hypersensitivity.
Participation with members of the subspecialty service in the diagnosis and therapeutic management of patients with rheumatologic diseases.
Student will work with practicing allergist in daily work with patients and participate in weekly allergy clinic and teaching conferences. Study of the literature. Will see patients with problems in clinical immunology, immunodeficiency, asthma, allergic rhinitis.
Participation in rheumatology consultation rounds, rheumatic disease clinics and conferences with supervised readings in rheumatology.
Part-time participation in active clinical and basic research projects which can involve both patient care and relevant laboratory procedures.
Physics of diagnostic imaging; x-ray production and interaction; image formation; modulation transfer function; fluoroscopy; cine fluoroscopy; stereoscopy; xeroradiography; computerized and geometrical tomography;magnetic resonance and ultrasound. Principles of radiation protection in imaging will be covered.
Medical radiation biology; molecular cellular and organ system response to acute and chronic irradiation; radiation carcinogenesis and genetic effects; radiation risk assessment; diagnostic ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging health effects. Medical/legal considerations of radiation exposure.
Introduces students to common radiology tests, including limitations and risks by using ACR Appropriateness Criteria and incorporate patient specific clinical data into ordering and interpreting appropriate imaging tests.
Work with clinical Radiologists in image interpretation fluoroscopy angiography image-guided intervention cardiac stress testing radionuclide therapy. Daily conferences in Radiology Diagnosis and Therapy Health Physics Radiation Safety. Prepare two clinical cases for in-class presentation. Assigned readings.
Main emphasis on radiology of acquired and congenital heart disease, but also on magnetic resonance, nuclear medicine, and echocardiography of heart diseases.
Work with Neuroradiologists in image interpretation of CT, MRI, and fluoroscopy. Opportunity to participate in assessment of Neurointerventional patients, and to observe Neurointerventional procedures. Daily conferences in Neuroimaging, General Radiology, Health Physics, and Radiology Safety. Assigned readings.
Participation in the radiological care of Pediatric patients; evaluate the patient receiving the radiographic study, including pertinent historical/physical findings. Student expected to write up case files on interesting cases encountered during their rotation.  
Work with Musculoskeletal Radiologists in interpretation of CT, MRI, radiography, and fluoroscopy. Opportunity to assess patients for, and to observe image-guided procedures. Daily conferences in Musculoskeletal Imaging, General Radiology, Health Physics, and Radiology Safety. Assigned readings.
Medical student will work with Vascular/Interventional Radiologists in the evaluation of patients for interventional procedures. There will be opportunities to Daily conferences in Neuroimaging, General Radiology, Health Physics, and Radiology Safety. Assigned readings.
Participation as an active team member on a busy clinical ultrasound service.  
Away Acting Internship rotation for Radiology and Nuclear Medicine.

Approved for graduate degree credit.
Consideration of the historical and philosophical formation of religion as a concept. Treats the emergence of religion as a category of analysis and understanding from the Reformation through the Enlightenment.  
Survey of classical 19th and 20th century approaches to the study of religion.
Consideration of major themes, issues and methods in the contemporary study of religion.  Perspectives from diverse cultural settings employed to consider modern historical, philosophical, and social contexts that inform understandings of religion.
Comparative, interpretive study of the treatment of specific topics in American religious cultures.
Comparative, interpretive study of the treatment of specific topics in Asian religious cultures.
Comparative, interpretive study of the treatment of specific topics in Mediterranean religious cultures.
Comparative, interpretive study of the treatment of religion through specific topics and themes relating to the body and praxis.
Comparative, interpretive study of the treatment of religion through specific topics and themes relating to language, rhetoric, and performance.
Comparative, interpretive study of the treatment of religion through specific topics and themes relating to modernity, science, and secularism.
Comparative, interpretive study of the treatment of religion through specific topics and themes relating to theory and method.
Comparative, interpretive study of the treatment of religion through specific topics and themes relating to values, ethics, and human rights.
Comparative, interpretive study of the treatment of religion through specific topics and themes relating to visual culture, media, and technology.
Focuses on historical theories of language that precede and accompany post-structuralist theory. Intended to introduce graduate students to the context of modern theory formation. May cover structuralism, integrationalism, and grammaticalization. 
Introduces the advanced study of Human Rights and the theoretical and practical elaboration of the international Human Rights system. Seminar engages with criticism of Human Rights and develops research and teaching within disciplinary and interdisciplinary frameworks.
Group Study
Research
Dissertation Writing.



Approved for graduate degree credit. Designed to combine basic nuclear physics, chemistry, and biology into a comprehensive and vigorous lecture-laboratory experience in biomedical nuclear chemistry. Subjects include choice and purification of appropriate gamma & beta radioisotopes, compounding biological pharmacodynamics and radioimmunoassay.
Physics of diagnostic and therapeutic nuclear medicine, nuclear physics, radioactive decay; interaction of ionizing radiation; dosimeters; attenuation; internal and external dosimetry; health physics; radiation detection and imaging, scintillation cameras, computerized planar and tomographic imaging. Offered at UC Davis Medical Center.
Clerkship correlates radioisotopic methods with clinical, pathophysiological, and other diagnostic aspects of the patients care. Each patient reviewed with student by faculty member. Reading assignments, informal projects, and research techniques available.
Approved for graduate degree credit.
Research in Nuclear Medicine.
Introduction to radiation oncology physics. Overview of treatment methodologies. Medical physics equipment. Treatment machine dosimetry, including calibration. Machine quality assurance. Patient dosimetry. Treatment planning. Simulation and treatment. Treatment quality assurance, including calculation checks and chart checks. Brachytherapy.  
Research under supervision of Radiation Oncology faculty. Work must be appropriate to fulfill the requirements for the Ph.D. degree.
Radiobiology lectures are designed to engage the physician residents, physics residents and medical students in learning Radiobiology principles and concepts during the year the Radiation Physics course is taught. 
Introduction to radiation oncology. Students will participate in workup and treatment planning for radiation oncology patients and will be introduced to the concepts involved in clinical radiation oncology, radiation biology, and radiation physics.
Externship provides in-depth exposure to the field of Radiation Oncology for students who rotation through an affiliated institution.
Advanced-level research seminar in clinical and/or translational radiation oncology. Work with the course instructor to generate a testable hypothesis.
Discussion of the readings assigned for course 10 and completion of a major research paper. 
Discussion of the readings assigned for RST 010 and completion of a major research paper. 


Development of Christianity from the end of the 1st century through the major controversies of the 5th century. Emphasis on the relationship between the new religious movement and the Roman Empire, and issues of early Christian identity and diversity.
Christianity in Europe and the Near East from the year 600 to 1450. Focus on the development of Catholic and Orthodox traditions in ritual, art, and thought, with attention to interactions between regional groups, and Christian interaction with Islam.
Study of religious lives, the quest for meaning and for personal identity; how religions frame the problems of life; how cultural and personal crises affect youthful identity; the nature and structure of dreams, myths, and ideals.
Historical and descriptive analysis of selected key figures in mystical traditions and readings of representative mystical texts. Analytic term paper.
Study of a book from the Prophets or writings from critical, historical, and religious perspectives. 
Examination of selected aspects of Jewish life, religion, or literature. Potential topics include: Jewish Perspectives on Jesus; The Golem: History and Legend; Sexuality and Gender in Late Antique Judaism and Early Christianity.
Survey of the Dead Sea Scrolls, apocryphal and pseudepigraphical writings of Judaism and Christianity and their historical, social, and religious importance.
Survey of the classical rabbinic Jewish texts such as the Talmud and of the social and historical contexts of their production in Palestine and Babylonia. 
Thematic study of a phenomenon in more than one religious tradition or of the relationship between religion and another cultural phenomenon. Topics may include archeology and the Bible, women and religion, religion and violence. 
Thematic study of specific sociological, literary or theological theme across the religious traditions of the ancient Mediterranean/Near East: Greek and Roman religions, Judaism, Christianity, Zoroastrianism, Manichaeism, etc. Topics may include creation, sacrifice, priesthoods, prophecies, holy books, the afterlife. 
Thematic study of specific sociological, literary or theological theme across the religious traditions of the ancient Mediterranean/Near East: Greek and Roman religions, Judaism, Christianity, Zoroastrianism, Manichaeism, etc. Topics may include creation, sacrifice, priesthoods, prophecies, holy books, the afterlife. 
Examination of the uses of the Judeo-Christian Scriptures in film. Topics include dramatic depictions of biblical stories, the tension between science and religion, allegorical treatments of biblical themes, and the problems of religious conviction.
Historical and systematic introduction to Christian doctrine, with attention to divergent traditions and the problem of orthodoxy and heresy.
Life and thought of the early Church as reflected by the Synoptic Tradition; Matthew, Mark, Luke and Acts. Offered every third year to alternate with RST 141B, RST 141C.
Life and thought of the early Church as reflected by the Johannine Tradition; the Gospel and letters of John. Offered every third year to alternate with RST 141A, RST 141C.
Life and thought of the early Church as reflected by the Pauline tradition. The letters of Paul. Offered every third year to alternate with RST 141A, RST 141B.
Extra-canonical Christian writings and their reception, from antiquity to the present. Emphasis on the importance of New Testament figures both as literary characters and as authors within different Christian traditions.
History of the formation of the Christian biblical canon, with emphasis on differences between Christian traditions; survey of translations and adaptations of biblical narrative in Christianity, Judaism, and Islam, as well as in contemporary culture.
Examination of several major movements and phenomena in 20th-century American religion.
Study of the religious bases of ethics through examination of ethical problems that arise in different religious cultures around the world and in nations where multiple religious cultures face similar issues.
Survey of religion and performing arts in India. Emphasis on the influence of colonialism, nationalism, and regionalism on the history of Indian performing arts.
The development of Islamic thought from the first centuries of Islam to the 18th century. Theology, philosophy, ethics, Sufism, historiography, political theory, fundamentalism, al-Farabi, al-Ghazzali, Ibn Rushd, Tusi, Ibn al-Arabi, Rumi, Molla Sadra, Ibn Khaldun, Ibn Abd al-Wahhab.
The development of Islamic law in the formative centuries of Islam, ca. 600-1000, as well as its adaptation to changing economic, social, and political conditions in subsequent periods. Legal schools, legal theory, the Shari'a, reformist movements, human rights. 
Introduction to culture and social life in Muslim societies.  Focus on the plurality of traditions in Muslim faith, reason, and everyday practice.  Special attention to Muslim rituals, ethical values, verbal genres, family life, sexuality and veiling, and youth culture.  
English-language survey of key Daoist texts and scholarship. Topics include Daoist concepts of the cosmos, the natural world, scripture, the body, and immortality; Daoist divinities; Daoism and the state.
A historical survey of the development of the language of symbolism and iconography in Hinduism. 
Primarily for seniors in Religious Studies. Discussion in depth of a problem in religion which requires the methods of several disciplines and is important in the encounter between religions.
Allows majors to integrate their disciplined study of the field. Emphasis on current scholarly debate about the methods for analyzing and comparing diverse religious traditions.


Focuses on controversies in the study of comparative religion. How is religion best defined? Are there methods unique to the study of religion? What does the study of religion contribute to the study of society in general? 
Examines relations between religion and colonialisms. Using specific historical situations it explores some of our thorniest theoretical problems. Acquire a solid understanding of postcolonial theory and the historical tools to critically engage religion in the present.
Selected topics in the history of Christianity. Intended for graduate students seeking to do advanced work in the study of Christianity. May cover issues in Christian thought from antiquity, the middle ages, the early modern or modern period.

Continuation of grammar and language skills developed in RUS 001.
Continuation of grammar and language skills developed in RUS 002.
Grammar review and conversational practice in Russian.
Grammar review. Introduction to literature in its sociopolitical context. Conversational practice.
Grammar review. Intermediate conversation and continued reading of literature. Social and cultural practices in contemporary Russia; introduction to Russian history.


Topics in Russian. Grammar for the advanced student. Reading and discussion of journalistic texts and classic and contemporary literature. Conversation exercises utilizing literary and colloquial variants of current Russian speech.
Continuation of RUS 101A. Topics in Russian grammar for the advanced student. Reading and discussion of journalistic texts and classic and contemporary literature. Conversational exercises utilizing literary and colloquial variants of current Russian speech.
Continuation of RUS 101B. Topics in Russian grammar for the advanced student. Reading and discussion of journalistic texts and classic and contemporary literature. Conversational exercises utilizing literary and colloquial variants of current Russian speech.
Practice in writing Russian.  One composition on a different topic each week.  Topics include: history, geography, politics, and literature of Russia; comparison of Russian and American lifestyles; current events.  Conducted in Russian.
Translation of Russian literary texts into stylistically equivalent idiomatic English.
Intensive conversational practice and discussion based on current events and contemporary texts.
Knowledge of Russian not required. Investigation of significant themes and issues of Russian literature and culture within their European context.
Study of Russian literature (prose fiction, drama, poetry) from the period between 1800 and the end of the 19th century. May include authors like Pushkin, Lermontov, Gogol, Turgenev, Dostoevsky, Tolstoy, Chekhov. Offered alternately in English or Russian. 
Study of Russian literature (prose, drama, poetry) from the period between 1900 and the end of the 20th century. Authors like Y. Olesha, M. Bulgakov, D. Kharms, and L. Petrushevskaia. Taught in Russian.
The main works of Russian dramatists from Fonvizin to the present, including Gogol, Turgenev, Tolstoy, Ostrovsky, Chekhov, Blok, Mayakovsky, Kharms.  Conducted in Russian.
History of Russian film; film & social revolution, the cult of Stalin, dissident visions; film & the collapse of the Soviet empire; gender and the nation in Russian film. Taught in English; Russian films with English subtitles.
Trends in Russian culture and the relationship between artists and the government. Topics: recent changes in the cultural scene, postmodernist trends in literature, visual art, film, and theater.   
Three major periods of Pushkin's poetical works: his early Lyceum verse; his poetry of the early 1820s; and the mature period. Further study of Pushkin's prose fiction, drama, and journalism.
Research essay, based on primary and secondary sources, dealing in depth with a topic arising from or related to the prerequisite literature course.
Guided research, under the direction of a faculty member, leading to a senior honors thesis on a topic in Russian studies.
Writing an honors thesis, under the direction of a faculty member, on a topic in Russian studies.
Tutoring in undergraduate courses, including leadership in small voluntary discussion groups affiliated with departmental courses.




SA&FS Portfolios are designed to complement interdisciplinary, academic coursework by supporting student development of each of the SA&FS Student Learning Outcomes: Systems Thinking, Experimentation & Inquiry, Understanding Values, Interpersonal Communication, Strategic Management, Civic Engagement and Personal Development. 
Lower-division internship for students enrolled in the Sustainable Agriculture & Food Systems program of study.
Group study on focused topics in Sustainable Agriculture & Food Systems. Varies according to instructor. Course plan is adapted to student need and interest in conjunction with the expertise of the instructor.
Under faculty supervision, students pursue a special or individualized course of study related to Sustainable Agriculture & Food Systems. 
Upper-division internship for students enrolled in the Sustainable Agriculture & Food Systems program of study. 
Undergraduates assist the instructor by tutoring students in regularly scheduled courses that fulfill SA&FS major requirements. 
Undergraduates assist the instructor by tutoring in the community in settings related to Sustainable Agriculture & Food Systems. 
Group study on focused topics in Sustainable Agriculture & Food Systems. Varies according to instructor. Course plan is adapted to student need and interest in conjunction with the expertise of the instructor.
Under faculty supervision, advanced students pursue a special or individualized course of study related to Sustainable Agriculture & Food Systems. 
Dependence of human societies on plant and plant products. Plants as resources for food, fiber, health, enjoyment and environmental services. Sustainable uses of plants for food production, raw materials, bioenergy, and environmental conservation. Global population growth and future food supplies.
Discussion of historical and current issues in environmental and resource sciences. Lectures, reading and field trips will provide background for selected topics.
Examination of a special topic in Science & Society through shared readings, discussions, written assignments, or special activities such as fieldwork, laboratory work, etc. 
Supervised internship on and off campus, in the community, or in institutional settings.
Tutoring in undergraduate Science & Society courses. Assisting with leading discussion groups under supervision of instructor(s) and teaching assistants. Acting as liaison between the students and course instructor(s) to foster effective communication and interaction.


Applications of evolutionary biology in medicine, human behavior, and agriculture. Examination of the imprint of evolution on the human life cycle from conception to death.
Study of a contemporary societal issue/problem emphasizing critical thinking with information drawn from several disciplines. Multiple instructors illustrate the necessity of an interdisciplinary and cooperative approach in solving important issues. Topics will vary.
Leadership, including issues, skills, and practices as they relate to individuals, organizations, diverse social settings and communities. Written and verbal communications, personality styles for collaborative work, and ethics.
Use digital media to communicate a succinct, compelling story. In lecture, discussion and activities, create storyboards and scripts, use video, audio, and editing technology, and produce a short media-rich video to effectively convey a message.
In-depth examination at an upper division level of a special topic in Science and Society. Emphasis upon student participation in learning.  
Supervised internship on or off campus, in the community, or in institutional settings.
Tutoring of students in Science & Society courses. Assistance with discussion groups and laboratory sections under supervision of instructor.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.



Practical experience in methods and problems related to teaching Science & Society courses. Discussion of critical pedagogies specific to teaching of science-societal issues, preparing for and conducting discussion sessions, analyses of texts and supporting material, formulation of assignments, exams.
Social-psychological analysis of personal experiences living in a multicultural society; conforming to or rejecting group identity or stereotypes; managing and reducing conflict; cross-cultural communication; promises and problems of diversity at UC Davis. Second course in a two-course Multicultural Immersion Program.
Examination of a special topic in sociology through shared readings, discussions, written assignments, or special activities such as fieldwork, laboratory work, etc. May not be repeated for credit.
Examination of a special topic in sociology through shared readings, discussions, written assignments, or special activities such as fieldwork, laboratory work, etc. May not be repeated for credit.
Primarily intended for lower division students.

Origins of modern sociological thought. Special emphasis on three major theorists from the classical tradition of 19th-century European social thought: Karl Marx, Max Weber, and Emile Durkheim.  
California's distinctive society and culture; sociological analyses of topical issues concerning diversity, environment, cities.
California's distinctive society and culture; sociological analyses of topical issues concerning diversity, environment, cities.
Surveys applications of research methods to the evaluation of social programs, primarily emphasizing methodological issues, e.g., research design and data collection; uses of evaluation research are also discussed and placed in theoretical context. Participation in an evaluation project.
Analysis of worldwide migration patterns, and social scientific theories of international and transnational migration. Focus in economical, political, and social impact of immigration and potential for international and regional cooperation.
Intermediate level course in statistical analysis of social data, emphasizing the logic and use of statistical measures, procedures, and mathematical models especially relevant to sociological analysis.
Relation of social cleavages and social cohesion to the functioning of political institutions; the social bases of local and national power structures; social sources of political movement, analysis of concepts of alienation, revolution, ideology, ruling class, and elite.
Social structural sources, institutional practices and microprocessesassociated with illegality, evil, disease, immorality, disability, racial and class differences, citizenship, and the body. Special emphasis on expert knowledge and the production and management of social difference.
Chronological age and social status; analysis of social processes bearing upon the socialization of children and adolescents. The emergence of youth cultures. Generational succession as a cultural problem.
Functions of schooling in contemporary U.S. society. Racial, ethnic, social class, and gender inequalities in student outcomes. Consideration of classic and current controversies in the sociology of education and education policy. 
Sociological approaches to study of historical and contemporary culture and mass media, and their structuring in relation to social actors, institutions, stratification, power, the production of culture, audiences, and the significance of culture in processes of change.
Everyday interaction in natural settings; ethnographic approaches to the understanding of social meanings, situations, personal identity and human relationships. Particular attention to the work of Erving Goffman and to principles of field observation and qualitative analysis.
Analysis of the influences of cultural differences and racial stratification on interpersonal interaction in instrumental settings (e.g., work, education, political action) and intimate settings (e.g., friendship, love, marriage, family). Minority/majority relationships.
Survey of historical and contemporary theoretical sociological perspectives on the Black experience in United States. Emphasis on comparisons of Black sociological perspectives and mainstream perspectives of specific sociologists.
Functions of the social definitions of race and racial groups. Analysis of racial conflict, oppression, and other forms of ethnic stratification. Models of ethnic interaction and social change. Emphasis on racial relationships within the U.S.
Contemporary family life in historical and cross-cultural perspective. How different family forms arose, their significance today and prospects for further family change. Attention to power relations within and beyond the family and to the social implications of family transformation.
Analysis of biological, psychological, cultural and structural conditions underlying the status and roles of men and women in contemporary society, drawing on a historical and comparative perspective.
Analysis of origins, dynamics, and social implications of sexual stratification. Examination of classical and contemporary theorists such as Engels, Freud, J.S. Mill, de Beauvoir, Juliet Mitchell, D. Dinnerstein. Attention to selected issues in social movements for and against sexual equality.
Asian American, Black, Chicano, and Native American family life in comparative historical perspective. Family structure and gender roles are considered in relation to socio-historical dynamics.
Asian American, Black, Chicano, and Native American family life in comparative historical perspective. Family structure and gender roles are considered in relation to socio-historical dynamics.
Social and cultural factors influencing friendships and intimate relationships. Topics include relationship development, relationship maintenance, and relationship loss.
Political and social transformations of African American communities between 1790 and 1990, as seen through film, literature, and music. Topics include: Black consciousness, Afro-Slave culture, The Harlem Renaissance, and contemporary Hip Hop.
Overview of the rapidly growing field of economic sociology. Focus on variations in the ways that markets are organized. The relationship between individual and collective rationality will also be emphasized.
Study of the history and power of the modern corporation; corporate organization; politics, the state, and the corporation; labor unions and the labor process; competition, regulation and international markets; the multinational and conglomerate corporation; and mass markets and consumerism.
Systems of social ranking, theories of stratification; power, prestige, culture, and styles of life of various social classes; social mobility and its consequences for social structure.
Selected technological and social factors. Preconditions of economic development and industrialization. Social, political, and cultural issues at various levels of economic development. Major historical differences and major current trends. Emphasis either on highly industrialized countries or on less developed countries.
Theories of city origins. Analysis of the historic process of urbanization and of varying city types. Comparison of American and European experience of metropolitanization,counterurbanization,and neighborhood change. Consideration of competing theories of urban growth and change and competing visions of the urban future.
Critical dissection of the loss of community issue. Analysis of the organization of primary ties in the city, of the culture of urban public life and of the learning of city skills.
Development of agriculture as a major enterprise in modern society with the concomitant reduction in the labor force and family farms. Analysis of issues including mechanization, migrant labor, corporate farming, and public resource policy.
Introduction to theories and contemporary issues in the sociology of development. Topics such as urbanization, rural/agrarian change, class, status groups, international division of labor, sectoral shifts, international capital, informal economy, gender, and political processes are analyzed within a comparative-historical framework.
Introduction to theories and contemporary issues in the sociology of development. Topics such as urbanization, rural/agrarian change, class, status groups, international division of labor, sectoral shifts, international capital, informal economy, gender, and political processes are analyzed within a comparative-historical framework.
Political-economic analysis of women and work during the process of socioeconomic change in the world with particular attention to the family/household context.
Relationship between social structures and religions. The social setting of the major world religions. Religious innovators and institutionalization (churches, sects, cults). Secularization in the modern world and the rise of secular ideologies.
Sociological theories and concepts applied toward understanding East Asian society. Emphasis on the political structure, stratification, and economy in China and Japan. Analysis of historical and contemporary similarities and differences.
Study of behavior of human crowds and masses in extraordinary circumstances, including crowd panics, mass scares, collective protests, riots, revolutionary situations, ecstatic and revivalist gatherings, crazes, fads, and fashions.
Historical, contemporary survey of religious traditions and organizations and their relation to U.S. social and cultural patterns. Civil religion, religious pluralism, minority and deviant communities, religious migration, U.S. religion as a social institution, and religion, politics, and social stratification.
Historical, contemporary survey of religious traditions and organizations and their relation to U.S. social and cultural patterns. Civil religion, religious pluralism, minority and deviant communities, religious migration, U.S. religion as a social institution, and religion, politics, and social stratification.
Sociological analysis of criminal behavior in relation to social structure and the criminalization process.
Sociological analysis of the different components of the criminal justice system including the emergence and interpretation of criminal laws, the contemporary roles and functions of the police, criminal courts and correctional institutions.
Study of juvenile delinquency in relation to the family, peer groups, community, and institutional structures. Consideration of processing of the delinquent by formal agencies of control.
Contemporary childhood in historical, cross-cultural, and global perspectives. Examine changes in understanding of the nature of childhood and "best interests of the child" by class, race, gender, geographic region, and historical period.
Theoretical tools for understanding the social determinants of health and health care, including such topics as health policy, social sources of illness, social construction of illness, medicalization, social disparities in health, and the illness experience.
Theoretical tools for understanding the social determinants of health and health care, including such topics as health policy, social sources of illness, social construction of illness, medicalization, social disparities in health, and the illness experience.
Law considered as social control; relation of legal institutions to society as affecting judicial decision making and administration of justice. Lawyers as an occupational group. Legal reform.
Analysis of several aspects of social movements: mobilization, forms of organization, ideology, recruitment, leadership, strategies and tactics, development, effects. Frequent use of sound and film materials.
Analysis of the causes, dynamics, and regulation of social conflict within and between various kinds of social groupings with particular reference to nonviolent methods of waging and regulating conflict.
Contemporary women's social movements in Latin America, focusing on Honduras, El Salvador, Brazil, and Nicaragua. Examination of exploitation and oppression in Latin America. 
Contemporary women's social movements in Latin America, focusing on Honduras, El Salvador, Brazil, and Nicaragua. Examination of exploitation and oppression in Latin America. 
Historical and contemporary overview of employment, work, and occupations in American society. Study of authority and power relations, labor markets, control systems, stratification, and corporate structures, and how these factors shape work in diverse or organizational and employment setting.
Production, consumption, and urban expansion. Basic social logics surrounding current problems of resource scarcity (environmental extractions) and excess wastes (environmental additions). Ways that society can change and re-organize itself to become more environmentally conscious and hence ecologically sustainable.
Empirical studies of the different aspects of the civil justice system in the United States and Global Society including the litigation, juries, civil rights, and international laws relating to trade, the environment, and human rights.
Analysis of how socio-cultural factors shape illness experience. Evaluation of how certain conditions come to be understood as health conditions; illness identities and biographies; doctor-patient interactions; biomedical cultures; and how race, ethnicity, and gender shape health practices. 
Survey of the social determinants and disparities in health: measurement of population health; health transitions and global disparities; domestic disparities in health by class, race/ethnicity, nativity, gender, and sexual orientation; social determinants including social support, social stress, neighborhoods, and policy.
Introduction to health policy and politics, including health care access and delivery, and policies related to health inequalities, the social determinants of illness and health behaviors.
Introduction to the study of human population, including theories and statistical measures; social causes and consequences of population trends; changes in population structure; geographical distribution, migration, sociopsychological factors affecting fertility.
How systems of social inequality organize the practice of violence. Definitions of violence and issues affecting the social capacity for violence. Analysis and comparison of different forms of violence associated with race, class, gender relations and social organization.
Examination of popular belief systems that accompany relations between social classes, whites and blacks, and men and women in the United States. How do dominant groups attempt to justify each relationship, and is there ideological conflict or consensus between groups.
Examination of popular belief systems that accompany relations between social classes, whites and blacks, and men and women in the United States. How do dominant groups attempt to justify each relationship, and is there ideological conflict or consensus between groups.
Introduction to analysis of literature as sociological data. Reading of numerous works on American and other societies by authors such as Steinbeck, Lewis, Dreiser, Schulberg, Orwell, etc.
Sociology of Jewish life, analyzing challenges to Jewish identity and community in the diaspora. Diversity within the Jewish community, Americanization, women, new immigrants, post-Holocaust Jewish identity, and LGBT Jews.
Examines the relationship between the media and social structures. History of mediastate relations. Media as reflector and shaper of values. Emphasis on current European and Marxist and pluralist theories rather than on content analysis.
Examines the relationship between the media and social structures. History of mediastate relations. Media as reflector and shaper of values. Emphasis on current European and Marxist and pluralist theories rather than on content analysis.
Social, cultural, and historical dimensions of knowledge, especially scientific knowledge. Problems, methods, and theory in sociology of scientific knowledge. Laboratory and historical case studies. Scientific and technical knowledge in institutional and organizational contexts.
Origins, characteristics, and consequences of various sanctions and punishment regimes including fines, banishment, incarceration, deportation, and execution.
Develops a sociological approach to organizations theory. Designed tointroduce sociological concepts, address the alternative psychological and economic models, and involve students in the practice of organizational analysis.
Builds on concepts and skills developed in SOC 180A. Deals with the issues of organizational decision making, design, and survival. Emphasis on relations between organizations and the effects of those relations in both the public and private sectors.
Builds on concepts and skills developed in SOC 180A. Deals with the issues of organizational decision making, design, and survival. Emphasis on relations between organizations and the effects of those relations in both the public and private sectors.
Analysis of organizations with social change and improvement goals and programs, emphasizing voluntary associations and grassroots citizen groups. Topics treated include formation, decision making and leadership, strategies and tactics, factionalism and coalitions, effectiveness.
Analysis of organizations with social change and improvement goals and programs, emphasizing voluntary associations and grassroots citizen groups. Topics treated include formation, decision making and leadership, strategies and tactics, factionalism and coalitions, effectiveness.
Formations, structures, and social life of historical and contemporary countercultural, utopian, dystopian, intentional, and religious communal settlements and movements, including comparison with other small settlement forms such as monasteries, villages, neighborhoods, encampments, and communities.
Formations, structures, and social life of historical and contemporary countercultural, utopian, dystopian, intentional, and religious communal settlements and movements, including comparison with other small settlement forms such as monasteries, villages, neighborhoods, encampments, and communities.
Examination of the economic, cultural, and political organization of major industrial and developing nations. Discussion of patterns and practices, alternative theoretical models of explanation, and case studies of organizations. Societies may include Japan, Germany, Egypt, China, and the U.S. 
Examination of the economic, cultural, and political organization of major industrial and developing nations. Discussion of patterns and practices, alternative theoretical models of explanation, and case studies of organizations. Societies may include Japan, Germany, Egypt, China, and the U.S. 
Examination of social policies that affect the well-being of individuals, families and groups, including such policies as old-age pensions, health insurance, and aid to the poor.
Examination of social policies that affect the well-being of individuals, families and groups, including such policies as old-age pensions, health insurance, and aid to the poor.
Economic and political systems and patterns of social interaction and inequality in China. State and corporate structures and practices, market and consumer behaviors, social mobility and stratification, protest and resistance.
Improved analytic writing and methods for reporting social science research to a wider public. Sociological analysis of the conditions of good and bad writing.
Improved analytic writing and methods for reporting social science research to a wider public. Sociological analysis of the conditions of good and bad writing.
In-depth examination at an upper division level of a special topic in Sociology. Emphasis on student participation in learning. May not be repeated for credit.
In-depth examination at an upper division level of a special topic in Sociology. Emphasis on student participation in learning. May not be repeated for credit.
Workshop in contemporary sociological theory that allows students to explore the uses of theory in empirical inquiry on problems of interest to students. Contemporary theory considered in relation to classical and modern influences, concept formation, theory construction, and explanation.
Workshop in contemporary sociological theory that allows students to explore the uses of theory in empirical inquiry on problems of interest to students. Contemporary theory considered in relation to classical and modern influences, concept formation, theory construction, and explanation.
Supervised internship and study in an agency, organization, or institution; application of sociological concepts to the work experience.
Supervised internship and study in an agency, organization, or institution; application of sociological concepts to the work experience. Maximum of 4 units may be counted toward the major.
Overview of the process of collecting, recording, analyzing, and reporting qualitative social data.  Emphasis on application of principles; each participant completes an original research project.
Independent study of a sociological problem involving the writing of an Honors thesis.
Independent study of a sociological problem involving the writing of an Honors thesis.
Directed reading, research and writing culminating in the preparation of a Senior Honors Thesis under direction of faculty advisor.
Directed reading, research and writing culminating in the preparation of a Senior Honors Thesis under direction of faculty advisor.
In-depth examination of topics in sociology. Emphasis on student research and writing.
Activities vary depending on the nature of the course assignment. May include (but not limited to) tutoring on course material, advising on projects and papers, and leading discussion groups.

Special study.
Comparative survey of sociological inquiry, taught as a practicum. Philosophy of social science; values and research; research agendas and research problem formulations; research process; explanations; interpretation; study design; concept formation, measure, sampling, data acquisition, inference; rhetoric and presentation of findings.
Survey of the statistical models and methods that serve as a foundation for quantitative research in sociology, with an emphasis on multivariate regression analysis, as well as measurement theory and time series analysis.
Principles of study design, examination of measurement, survey research methods and multivariate analysis. Stresses actual practice of techniques. Carry out quantitative data analysis using packaged computer programs.
Analysis of the logic and application of an advanced statistical model; the particular model chosen may vary.  Emphasis on the model's assumptions, its strengths and weaknesses, its application for social science inquiry, and the relationship between methods and social theory.
Introduces students to topics and selected issues in the related fields of economic and political sociology and political economy.
Report and discussions of literature on selected forms of deviance in relation to law and formal social control. Agency contacts and exploratory research projects.
Overview of sociological theories accounting for the form, role, and evolution of educational systems.  Emphasis on empirical research on education and social stratification and application to educational policy. 
Advanced study of the varying approaches, methods, issues and topical concerns of sociological social psychology. Analysis of central and representative historical and contemporary works.
Major theoretical traditions and concerns in family sociology and sociology of gender. Analysis of selected classical and contemporary works representative of functionalist, Marxist, psychoanalytic, feminist and critical theoretical approaches to these subjects; e.g., Engels, Parsons, Freud, Horkheimer, Goode, Lasch, Mitchell. Emphasis on macro and historical questions.
Introduction to comparative and case methodological approaches to sociohistorical inquiry, theoretical and practical issues, and substantive research agendas ranging from study of large-scale social transformations to close microhistories, including research agendas being developed by students in the course.
Analysis of social and economic problems of developing societies from the standpoint of theory and research on modernization and underdevelopment. Nature of third world dependency and interdependence in the global political economy.
Analysis of the nature of the legal process and its impact on social behavior. Will consider (1) nature and functions of law, (2) the organization and administration of law, and (3) the capacity of law toaffect social behavior.
Explores the uses of theories in contemporary sociology by tracing their connections with classical sociological writings and their relations to broader theoretical concerns of contemporary social thought, with particular emphasis on relevance to the current historical, cultural and social milieu.
How social institutions affect and are affected by the level and variation of mortality, migration, and fertility. Special emphases on the determinants of fertility-related attitudes and behavior, on less-developed countries, and on contemporary empirical studies.
Continuing training in field, quantitative, and/or comparative-historical methods. Emphasis on students' research projects and applications of principles related to research design, concept and theory construction causality and interpretation, and data and measurement. Completion of research paper is required. 
Introduction to the logic, methods, and practices of field research, with particular emphasis on the ethnographic tradition of participant observation. Interviewing and other qualitative techniques will also be covered. Students will develop original research projects based on their own fieldwork.
Introduction to graduate training in sociology. A seminar designed to introduce students entering graduate work in the department to its ongoing research activities.
Research topics in Sociology. Specific topic will vary according to faculty interest and student demand.


Practical instruction in teaching methods for qualitative and quantitative courses. Pedagogical issues involved in critical sociological analysis.
Practical instruction in devising course syllabi, lectures and assignments for Associate-Instructors and others interested in college teaching. Discussion of pedagogical methods of teaching qualitative and quantitative courses.

A workshop to assist advanced graduate students in the preparation of an original research paper. Students present their research papers and discuss issues in theory, research design, data, empirical inference, and verbal and written presentation of a professional research paper.
Continuation of SPA 001 and SPA 001S in the areas of grammar and basic language skills.
Continuation of SPA 001 and SPA 001S in the areas of grammar and basic language skills. May be taught abroad in a Spanish speaking country under the supervision of UC Davis faculty/lecturer.
Continuation of SPA 001, SPA 001S, or previous high school experience in the areas of grammar and basic language skills. Online format combining synchronous chatting with technologically based materials.
Continuation of SPA 001 or SPA 001S in the areas of grammar and basic language skills. Hybrid format combining classroom instruction with technologically based materials.
Completion of grammar sequence and continuing practice of all language skills using cultural texts. 
Completion of grammar sequence and continuing practice of all language skills using cultural texts. May be taught abroad in a Spanish speaking country under the supervision of UC Davis faculty.
Continuation of SPA 002, SPA 002S, SPA 002V or SPA 002Y. Online format combining synchronous chatting with technologically based materials.
Completion of grammar sequence and continuing practice of all language skills using cultural texts. Hybrid format combining classroom instruction with technologically based materials.
Designed to develop oral communication skills. Emphasis on increasing vocabulary, improving listening comprehension, pronunciation, accuracy and grammar control. Practice of everyday situations.
Review and development of grammar, vocabulary and composition acquired in the first year through exercises and reading of modern texts. 
Review and development of the grammar, vocabulary and composition acquired in the first year through exercises and reading of modern texts. May be taught abroad.
Continuation of SPA 003, SPA 003V, SPA 003Y, SPA 003S, or previous high school experience in the areas of grammar and intermediate language skills. Online format combining synchronous chatting with technologically based materials.
Continuation of SPA 003, SPA 003S, SPA 003V and SPA 003Y in the areas of grammar and basic language skills. Hybrid format combining classroom instruction with technologically based materials where learning takes place both face-to-face and online.
Development of all language skills through exercises and reading of modern texts. Development on more difficult grammar concepts and further practice on composition. 
Development of all language skills through exercises and reading of modern texts. Development of more difficult grammar concepts and further practice on composition. May be taught abroad.
Continuation of SPA 021, SPA 021V, SPA 021Y, SPA 022S, or previous high school experience in the areas of grammar and intermediate language skills. Online format combining synchronous chatting with technologically based materials.
Continuation of SPA 021, SPA 021S, or SPA 021V in the areas of grammar and basic language skills. Online format combining synchronous chatting with technologically based materials.
Development of writing skills by way of reading, discussion, and analysis of authentic materials, literary texts, and videos. Selective review of grammar. Composition, journals, individual and group projects.  
Development of writing skills by way of reading, discussion, and analysis of authentic materials, literary texts, and videos. Selective review of grammar. Composition, journals, individual and group projects. May be taught abroad in Spanish speaking country.
Development of advanced level writing skills, with emphasis on how to write argumentative prose, essays, and research papers. Introduction to the analysis of literary genres. Compositions, journals, individual and group projects. 
Development of advanced level writing skills, with emphasis on how to write argumentative prose, essays, and research papers. Introduction to the analysis of literary genres. Compositions, journals, individual and group projects. May be taught abroad.
Continuation of SPA 008. Designed to develop oral communication skills at a more advanced level. Practice in more complex situations. (Former SPA 009)
First course of a three-quarter series designed to provide bilingual students whose native language is Spanish with the linguistic and learning skills required for successfully completing upper division courses in Spanish. Intensive review of grammar and composition.
Continuation of SPA 031, intensive review of grammar and composition. Development of all language skills through reading of modern texts, presentation/discussion of major ideas, vocabulary expansion, and writing essays on topics discussed. Designed for students whose native language is Spanish.
Development of writing skills, with emphasis on experimenting with various writing styles: analytical, argumentative, and creative. Analytical review of literary genres. Written essays will be assigned. Students will develop a research paper. Designed for students whose native language is Spanish.
Primarily for lower division students. May be taught abroad.
Student facilitated course intended primarily for lower division students.

Principles of literary criticism applied to the study of fiction, drama, poetry, and essay of major literary writers of the Hispanic world.  
Principles of literary criticism applied to the study of fiction, drama, poetry and essay of major literary writers of the Hispanic world. May be taught abroad in a Spanish speaking country under the supervision of a UC Davis faculty/lecturer.
Practice in expository writing with emphasis on clarity and idiomatic expression. Practical application and review of selected grammar topics. (Part of former SPA 110A & SPA 110B.)
Linguistic description of the sound patterns of Spanish and how those sounds can be used to form larger units, such as morphemes and words. Theoretical and practical comparisons with English and with other Romance languages. (Former SPA 132.)
Study of Spanish word and phrase structure, with special emphasis on the constituent structure of noun and verb phrases. Theoretical and practical comparisons with English and with other Romance languages. (Former SPA 131.)
Sound structure of modern Spanish; theoretical analysis of selected problems in pronunciation. Strongly recommended for prospective teachers of Spanish.
Contrastive analysis of English and Spanish, error analysis, introduction to structuralist and transformational linguistics. Individual and group conferences. (Former SPA 137.)
Spanish language from its roots in spoken Latin to modernity. Emphasis on the close relationship between historical events and language change, and the role that literature plays in language standardization.  
Spanish language from its roots in spoken Latin to modernity. Emphasis on the close relationship between historical events and language change, and the role that literature plays in language standardization. Taught abroad in a Spanish speaking country under the supervision of a UC Davis faculty/lecturer.
Exploration of the major theoretical and practical issues concerning learning Spanish as a second language. For students interested in teaching Spanish as a career. May be taught abroad.
Exploration of the major theoretical and practical issues concerning learning Spanish as a second language. For students interested in teaching Spanish as a career. May be taught abroad in a Spanish speaking country, in Spanish, under the supervision of UC Davis faculty.
Designed for students interested in teaching Spanish to native speakers. Focus on cultural diversity of the Spanish speaking population in the United States; applied language teaching methodologies in the context of teaching Spanish to native speakers at different levels.
Study of specialized topics in Spanish linguistics, for example: language and use; text and context; language and society; bilingualism; Spanish dialectology; syntax and semantics.
Intensive writing of poetry or fiction in Spanish or in a bilingual (Spanish/English) format. Students will write both in prescribed forms and in experimental forms of their own choosing.
Survey of Spanish literature (narrative, poetry and drama) to 1700, Emphasis on the multicultural birth of the Spanish culture, the formation and growth of the Spanish language and letters through its written records and the literature of the early period.
Survey of modern Spanish literature, providing an overview of main literary movements (romanticism, realism, naturalism, modernism, avantgarde). Emphasis on the philosophical and historical background and on the European context for modern Spanish literature. (Part of former SPA 104A & SPA 104B.)
Golden Age drama: text and performance. Study of Spanish Baroque drama as performance art. Close reading of plays and related aspects of 17th-century theater: theatrical spaces, staging, performance, actors, public, language, costumes. Final project is performance of a play.
Introduction to the study of the principal authors and literary movements of 16th- and 17th-century Spain and Spanish American colonial literature. 
Critical interpretation of Don Quijote Part One by Cervantes.  Focused study of key elements within the socio-cultural context of Golden Age Spain.  Don Quijote as prototype for the modern novel.  
Critical interpretation of Don Quijote Part Two by Cervantes.  Focused study of key elements within the socio-cultural context of Golden Age Spain.  Don Quijote as prototype for the modern novel.   
Romanticism as a philosophical concept, and as a literary movement in Spain, with emphasis on its distinctive, specific "romantic" qualities and its literary expression in five leading authors of the early-19th century. (Former SPA 114.)
Literary realism in Spain, focusing on Leopoldo Alas (Clarn), Emilia Pardo Bazn and Benito Prez Galds unique characteristics of Spanish realism and its historical roots in Cervantes and the picaresque.
Study of the main literary trends and authors of the modern Spanish novel and short story. Selected works by Unamuno, Valle-Incln, Sender, Cela, Matute, Ayala and others. 
Study of the main literary trends and authors of modern and contemporary Spanish poetry. Selected works by Machado, Juan Ramn Jimnez, Garca Lorca, Guilln, Aleixandre, Hernndez Hierro and others. Offered in alternate years. (Former SPA 120C.)
Study of the main dramatic trends and playwrights of modern Spanish theater. Selected works by Valle Incln, Garca-Lorca, Mihura, Buero-Vallejo, Arrabal and others. Offered in alternate years. 
Ortega, Unamuno and the modern Spanish essay. Their concept of Spain and their relations with other movements and thinkers.
Introduction to history, geography and culture of Spain. Art, history of ideas, and everyday cultural manifestations.  Introduction to critical reading and textual analysis.
Introduction to history, geography and culture of Spain. Art, history of ideas, and everyday cultural manifestations. Introduction to critical reading and textual analysis. May be taught abroad in a Spanish speaking country under the supervision of UC Davis faculty.
Special topics in the study of Spanish literature and culture. May be taught abroad.
Study of specific historical tendencies in Spanish culture(s) from the Romans to the present.  Sources studied may include literature, film, art, journalism, and performance.  Approaches to material may address issues of aesthetics, politics, identity, and globalization.
Analysis of the culture of the Spanish-speaking world through film in translation.  Emphasis on the cultural information illustrated by the films; no prior knowledge of cinematography required.  Films with subtitles.  
Analysis of the culture of the Spanish-speaking world through film in translation. Emphasis on the cultural information illustrated by the films; no prior knowledge of cinematography required. Films with subtitles. May be taught abroad in a Spanish speaking country, in Spanish, under the supervision of UC Davis faculty.
Reading, lectures and discussions in English of works by Borges, Cortzar, Fuentes, Garca Mrquez, Paz and others. May not be counted toward the major in Spanish.
Latin American literature from preconquest texts and the chronicles of the Conquest to romanticism and modernism. Reading selections include fiction, poetry, drama and essays.
Latin American literature from 1900 to the present. Reading selections include fiction, poetry, drama, essays, testimonio, etc. 
Evolution of the Latin American short story from the 19th century to the present. Emphasis on the contemporary period. 
Evolution of the Latin American novel from the 19th century to the present. Emphasis on significant contemporary works. 
Evolution of the Mexican novel from the 19th century to the present. Emphasis on the narrative of the Revolution and significant contemporaryworks. 
Modernism as an authentic expression of Latin American literature and its influence on 20th-century poetry and prose. In depth analysis of the works of Daro and other major writers of the era. Offered in alternate years. 
Study of major works of Latin American literature/culture and their cultural and literary milieus. May include novels, poetry, film, etc.  Works may be analyzed in terms of style, influence, cultural significance, political importance, and/or commercial success.
Study of vanguardism, surrealism, and more recent movements of Latin American poetry. An in-depth analysis of the works of such major poets as Neruda, Vallejo, and Paz.
Special topics in the study of Latin American literature and culture.  
Special topics in the study of Latin American literature and culture. May be taught abroad in a Spanish speaking country under the supervision of UC Davis faculty. 
Special topics in the study of Latin American literature and culture. Hybrid format combining classroom instruction with technologically based materials.
Latin American women writers from the 19th and 20th centuries. Recent theoretical approaches to literature by women in Latin America. Discussions in English of works by Matto de Turner, Avellaneda, Storni, Ocampo, Agustini, Mistral, Castellanos, and others.
Introduction to histories and cultures of Latinx (Mexican American, Puerto Rican, Salvadoran American, Ecuadorian American, etc.) populations of the US. Multiple genres of cultural production and representation, with a focus on cultural diversity and regional difference. Introduction to critical analysis across multiple genres of cultural production (literature, visual culture, media culture, etc.).
Special topics in the study of Chicanx and/or Latinx literature and culture.
Introduction to history, geography and culture of Latin America. Multiple genres of cultural production and representation, with a focus on cultural diversity and regional difference. Introduction to critical reading and textual analysis.
Introduction to history, geography and culture of Latin America. Multiple genres of cultural production and representation, with a focus on cultural diversity and regional difference. Introduction to critical reading and textual analysis. May be taught abroad in a Spanish-speaking country.
Examination of music from Latin America. Characteristic music (i.e. tango, bossa nova, salsa, musica motena, musica andina) as well as its implications in other musical genres. Taught in English or Spanish depending on instructor.
Examination of music from Latin America. Characteristic music (i.e. tango, bossa nova, salsa, musica motena, musica andina) as well as its implications in other musical genres. May be taught abroad in English or Spanish depending on instructor.  
Study of Mexican culture through a diversity of cultural expression, including elite, popular and mass media culture.  Focus on national icons and archetypes, multiculturalism, transnationalism.
Understanding Latin American cultures through cinema. History and critical analysis of Latin American film. Focus on a national cinematic tradition. Comparative experiences in different parts of Latin America and/or a particular era. Conducted entirely in Spanish.
Interdisciplinary survey of Chicano culture. Topics include literature, art, folklore, oral tradition, music, politics, as well aseveryday cultural manifestations. Conducted in Spanish. (Former SPA 124.)
Specific historical tendencies and issues in Latin American culture(s) from precolombian times to present. Studies of literature, film, art, journalism and performance. Focus on issues of aesthetics, politics, identity, and globalization. May be taught abroad.
Survey of the literary and cultural contributions of the main Spanish-speaking populations present in the U.S.: Chicanos, Puerto Ricans, Cuban-Americans, Central Americans, and other Latinos.
Interdisciplinary survey on the relationship between California and Latin America (1500s-present). Latin American representations of California and Californian representations of Latin America, as well as borderlands texts, with a special focus on Mexican-American perspectives. Conducted in Spanish.
For students with an advanced level of Spanish interested in the use of Spanish in the health care, legal and law enforcement and marketing and business professions.  Field trips documenting the use of Spanish in the public context.
Group study of a special topic drawn from Spanish linguistics. Independent research project.
Group study of a special topic drawn from Spanish literary or cultural studies. Independent research project.
Group study of a special topic drawn from Latin American literary or cultural studies. Independent research project.
Internships in fields where Spanish language skills can be used and perfected (teaching, counseling, translating-interpreting). May be taught abroad.
Guided research, under the direction of a faculty member, leading to a senior honors thesis on a topic in Spanish literature, civilization, or language studies.  
Tutoring in undergraduate courses including leadership in small voluntary discussion groups affiliated with departmental courses.
Tutoring in public schools under the guidance of a regular teacher and supervision by a departmental faculty member.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.
Student facilitated course intended primarily for upper division students.
Under the supervision of a faculty member, an undergraduate student plans and develops the course they will offer under 098F/198F.
Student-facilitated course under the supervision of a faculty member, an undergraduate student teaches a course under 098F/198F.
Basic theories and practical approaches to modern and contemporary Hispanic literature. Emphasis on formalism, poststructuralism, socio-cultural discourses, and ideologies.
Major contemporary critical theories including recent, innovative approaches to Hispanic literature and culture. Readings from Semiotics and Deconstructionism to Psychological and Socio-ideological approaches. Emphasis on Postmodern and Neo-colonial discourse.
Analyzes the sound patterns of Spanish from both linear and non-linear perspectives. Students will develop a clear understanding of what phonology is and the nature of Spanish phonology, as defined by modern linguistic analysis.
An examination of Spanish word order within the framework of general linguistic theory. The student will investigate how to write a grammarof Spanish with particular attention to the structure of noun and verb clauses.
History of the Spanish language. (Former SPA 220A.)
An in-depth linguistic examination of Old Spanish texts from the 12th to the 15th centuries, with particular attention to the significance of orthographic changes.
Descriptive and historical study of the distinctive features of Peninsular and American Spanish dialects. (Former SPA 221.)
Focuses on the relevant linguistic aspects of teaching Spanish. Designed for graduate students who have an interest in second-language learningand teaching.
Specialized topics in Hispanic linguistics (e.g., pragmatics, sociolinguistics, topics in syntax, semantics, or diachronic studies). May be repeated for credit when topic differs.
Foundation for the acquisition of Catalan oral, reading and elementary writing level skills for students of Spanish (Iberianists or Hispanists), with the capacity to interpret educated written language. Emphasis on weekly review of grammar and all language skills.
Critical approaches to Spanish narrative and essay.
Critical approaches to Spanish poetry and drama.
Artistic development of a major Spanish writer and his/her intellectual and literary milieu or study of a special topic, period, or genre. May be repeated for credit with consent of instructor.
An exploration of the major genres of Medieval Spanish prose from its origins to 1450.
Medieval Spanish epic narratives. Major theoretical perspectives on the genesis, diffusion, and character of the Medieval epic. Relationship of epic to ballad literature.
Analysis of the most representative lyric poetry in the various Peninsular languages and in provencal, troubadour poetry, kharjas, villancicos, cantigas de amigo, and courtly lyric.
Extensive critical study of the main currents of Renaissance and Baroque Spanish poetry through its language structures, styles (Culteranismo-Conceptismo), rhetorical devices, myths, and themes (love, death, time).
Exploration of major 16th and 17th century literary and cultural developments through the study of selected dramas.
Origins and development of the Spanish novel during the Renaissance and the Spanish Golden Age.
Narrative works of Miguel de Cervantes with special emphasis on Don Quijote.
Topics of Spanish literature, from 1700-1920.
Critical analysis of modern Spanish poetry from a wide spectrum of poetic currents.
Study of the 20th-century novel and short story with emphasis on the avant-garde, existentialism, social realism, and postmodern trends. 
The Spanish theatrical production of the last 70 years.
Major thinkers from Ganivet to Unamuno and Ortega y Gassett. Emphasis will be placed on the relationships between Spanish thought and European philosophical currents.
Introduction to the development of a feminine consciousness in the Spanish contemporary literary scene. Selected texts represent particularly innovative typologies of feminine discourse in the realm of the historical, psychoanalytical, and metafictional, erotic, and allegorical fiction.
Development of Latin American literary periods and currents in narrative (novel, short story, and essay), from early colonial times to the present.  
Development of Latin American literary periods and currents in poetry and drama, from early Colonial times to the present.  
Artistic development of a major Latin American writer and his/her intellectual and literary milieu or study of a special topic, period, or genre.
An examination of pre-Hispanic and Colonial narrative, poetry and theatre. Emphasis on historical, anthropological, and ethnographic approaches to Colonial discourse.
Major Latin American dramatists from Florencio Snchez to the present. (Former SPA 240.)
Study of main trends and key authors in Latin America in the first half of the 20th century. (Former SPA 241A.)
Recent developments in Latin American narrative. Emphasis on innovative language and structure. (Former SPA 241B.)
Study of the evolution of Mexican narrative. Emphasis on the narrativeof the Revolution and significant contemporary works.
Study of feminist critical theories, gender construction, and self-representation within the history of socio-cultural changes in Latin America.
Study of poetry and prose of Spanish-American Modernism (1880-1916). (Former SPA 245.) Offered in alternate years.
Study of main trends in Cuban literature. Emphasis on historical, geographic, social and cultural context (including music and film). Taught in English; some readings in Spanish.


Theoretical instruction in modern teaching methods and demonstration of their practical application. Required of graduate teaching assistants.

Students apply theory and concepts learned in the classroom through field work in a community health agency.
Provide basic concepts and controversies in public health, basic science of public health, social and behavioral factors in health and disease, environmental and occupational health issues, the relationship of public health to the medical care system and health care reform.
Preparation for internship in campus and community substance abuse prevention and educational intervention. Addiction and other physiological responses to alcohol and other drugs. Harm-reduction strategies for individuals and target populations. Practice in peer counseling skills and outreach presentations to groups.
Preparation for internship in campus and community health promotion and risk reduction. Nutrition, stress management, physical fitness, body image and disordered eating, skin cancer prevention, and other general wellness/health promotion topics.
Seminar on key issues and current topics in public health. 
Weekly conference on research problems, progress, and techniques in Community and International Health. Critical discussion of recent journal articles.
The student, through fieldwork in a community health agency, learns to apply theory and concepts learned in the classroom.
Study and experience for undergraduate students in any number of areas in community and international health.
Student will work with faculty member in areas of research interest, including but not limited to injury control, international health, health policy, occupational and environmental health, health promotion and wellness, women's health, and health demographics.
Provides an overview of public health. Covers the history of public health in the U.S.; defines its major functions and constituencies; and, introduces fundamental principles of epidemiology, biostatistics, behavioral sciences, environmental health, infectious diseases, and reducing health disparities.
Public health issues in Californias Central Valley, including the influences of  migration, racial and ethnic diversity, the agricultural industry, environmental exposures, and rurality. 
Aimed at current and future public health professionals interested in learning more about the educational potential for interactions with community members and other health professionalsall stakeholders in improving the health of communities.
Basic epidemiologic concepts and approaches to epidemiologic research, with examples from  human medicine, including outbreak investigation, infectious disease epidemiology, properties of tests. 
In-depth integration of advanced epidemiological concepts. Theory, methods, and applications for observational studies including random and systematic error, confounding, counterfactuals, causal inference, effect modification, internal and external validity, estimability, and interpretation of effect measures, and advanced study designs.
Principles and applications of cancer prevention and control from a public health perspective.
Collection, verification, and utilization of data related to populations; infrastructure, functions, and tools used to generate public health knowledge supporting public health practices and policy development/dissemination.
Principles of migration and health. Topics will include demographics, public health invention programs, health care delivery, occupational health, and effects of international migration on the health in communities of origin, transit and destination. Guest presentations by outside experts.
Introduction to the principles and practice of health disparities research.
Theories and strategies of health behavior change at the individual, group, community, and environmental levels. Examples include: transtheoretical model, social networks, and social marketing. Theories are applied to solve common public health problems (cancer, obesity, smoking, and HIV/AIDS).
Look at causes of the obesity epidemic in the U.S.; identify and critically assess the research literature on various prevention strategies; understand, and apply evidence-based public health strategies to combat obesity; and translate the science to a general audience. 
Health communication theories and research traditions. Topics include consumer health information seeking; physician-patient interaction; information, social marketing, edutainment, and media advocacy campaigns;  social networks and coping; media influences on health; and new communication technologies in health promotion and healthcare delivery.
Principles of health communication campaign planning, implementation and evaluation. Strategies for changing health behaviors, shaping policy, and improving healthcare organizations relations with stakeholders.)
Analysis of data and design of experiments for laboratory data.
Emphasizes critical biostatistics for clinical research and targets biomedical audience. Students will develop understanding for basic planning and analysis of clinical studies and learn to develop collaborations with biostatisticians.
Statistical methods for experimental design and analysis of laboratory data including gene expression arrays, RNA-Seq, and mass spec.
Social determinants of health; psychosocial and physiological pathways; health and social inequality; gender and racial/ethnic disparities in health; social support, social cohesion and health; social gradient in behavioral risk factors; social ecological approaches to health intervention; interventions addressing social determinants.
Human reproductive effects and risk of reproductive disorders, examined from macro- and micro-environmental exposures in community and occupational settings, epidemiologic study designs and analyses.
Principles, approaches and issues related to environmental health.  Recognizing, assessing, understanding and controlling the impact of people on their environment and the impact of the environment on the public.
Principles of demand and supply; elasticity; benefits and costs; least squares regression; stepwise regression; economic and statistical significance; fixed and random effects; longitudinal data; non-linear relations; continuous and binary variables; instrumental variables; attrition bias; tobit regression; Two-part cost model.
Principles and applications in analysis of epidemiologic data. Methods of analyzing stratified and matched data, logistic regression for cohort and case-control studies, Poisson regression, survival-time methods.
Structure and function of public and private medical care. Topics include categories and trends in national medical spending, predictors of patient use, causes of death, managed care, HMOs, Medicare, Medicaid, costs of technology, and medical care in other countries.
Cost-effectiveness/cost-benefit analysis (CE/CBA) methods among various economic evaluation methods. CE/CBA is increasingly used to evaluate alternative choices in public health and clinical practice and to enlighten and inform health policy determinations.
Uses regression methods for cost-effectiveness analysis.  Focus on methods that create and explain economic information in person-level data.  
Introduction to SAS, an integrated software system for data retrieval and management, data manipulation and programming.
SAS programming for graduate students in the public health sciences or other fields who plan to use SAS software for data analysis. 
Key issues and current topics in public health. Begins in August summer session II. Must enroll in August, then Fall and Winter. Course is a series but grades and units are given at end of each quarter.
Seminar to explore research on translational science and rural health; includes presentations of student research in progress.
Public Health Translational Science Rotation for Ph.D. students in Public Health Sciences. 
Public Health Translational Science Rotation for Ph.D. students in Public Health Sciences. 
Forum for learning health issues and health care systems in other countries. Topics include health care for refugees, the impact of political strife on health, the health care professional in international settings.  
Practical fieldwork experience in public health.  Placement site will vary based on the interest and experience of each student.
Study and experience for graduate students in any number of areas in community and international health.
Work with faculty member in areas of research interest, including but not limited to injury control, international health, health policy, occupational and environmental health, health promotion and wellness, women's health, and health demographics.
The vocabulary needed to conduct a basic history and physical examination in Spanish.
Overview of local community health in group practice situations. Students participate in treatment at several clinic sites in Yolo County. Topics include primary care, environmental health, maternal and child health, jail health, and preventive health care for the aged.
Participate at state or county health department or other public health organization in on-going investigations into current public health problems, e.g., birth defects, cancer control, diabetes, hypertension, injury control, infectious diseases, aging, Alzheimer's disease, and smoking and tobacco use control.
Participate in activities of Occupational and Environmental Health Unit. Major activity is involvement in an epidemiologic research project of the University. Participate in Occupational and Environmental Medicine Clinic at UC Davis Medical Center and other sites, as arranged.
Outpatient clinical experience in Occupational and Environmental Medicine at UCDMC and other sites, as arranged. Gain experience in evaluating occ/env medical conditions, use of medical literature resources, the worker's compensation system, and toxicological principles.
Observe and participate in research and clinical activities in occupational and environmental medicine which include conferences, occupational and environmental medicine clinical activities and field visits. Develop and present small individual research projects.
Forum for learning health issues and health care systems in other countries.  Topics include health care for refugees, the impact of political strife on health, the health care professional in international settings.
Study and experience for medical students in areas in community and international health.
Work with faculty member in areas of research interest, including but not limited to public health, injury control, international health, health policy, occupational and environmental health, health promotion and wellness, women's health, and health demographics.
Work experience off and on campus in soil science. Internship supervisedby a member of the faculty.
Soil as part of natural and managed ecosystems and landscapes. Solid, liquid, and gas phases and their interactions in the soil. Water, gas and heat movement in soil. Soil biology. Plant nutrient acquisition and use.Soil development, management and use.
Soil chemistry processes related to the fate and transport of contaminants in soil. Soil minerals, natural organic matter, surface charge, soil solution chemistry, redox reactions in soil, and sorption of inorganic and organic contaminants. 
Field-based studies of soils in California ecosystems, away from campus, throughout California. Emphasis on description and classification of soils; relationships among soils, vegetation, geology, and climate; physical, chemical, and biological processes in soils on the landscape; and the role of soils in land use. 
Physical properties of soil. Principles of water, gas, heat, and solute movement in soil with selected examples related to soil and water management. Influence of soil properties on transfer processes.
Availability of nutrients in organic and conventional agricultural, vineyard, orchard and plantation forest soils; management of fertilizers, cover crops, compost, sewage sludge and manures for crop production and to prevent loss to the environment is emphasized.
Major groups of microorganisms in soil, their interrelationships, and their responses to environmental variables. Role of microorganisms in cycling of nutrients. Plant-microbe relationships. Transformations of organic and inorganic pollutants.
Overview of living constituents of soils, their interactions, importance to, and impact on biogeochemical cycles, decomposition, and soil properties. Practical applications of soil biological diversity are emphasized.
Soils are considered as elements in land use planning and environmental quality. Topics include: soil survey reports, remote sensing, land capability classification, soil erosion/conservation, waste disposal on soils and soil reclamation. One one-day field trip.
Recognition and description of soils; chemical, biological and physical processes of soil formation. Factors of soil formation. Interactions of soils with diverse ecosystems. Introduction to soil classification. Practice using soil taxonomy. Practical experience describing soil properties in the field.
Work experience off and on campus in soil science. Internship supervisedby a member of the faculty.


Reviews of current research in soil chemistry. Topics include double layer theory; clay mineral and oxide surface chemistry; adsorption on soil surfaces; speciation and modeling of solution ions; solubility and mineral stability diagrams. 
Field-based soil studies in California ecosystems. Description and classification of soils; relationships among soils, vegetation, geology, and climate; physical, chemical, and biological processes; their role in land use. Similar to SSC 105; requires additional work for graduate credit.
Plant needs, occurrence and reactions of water and mineral nutrients in soils; root systems and their growth in soils; mass flow and diffusion mechanisms in nutrient acquisition; models relating nutrient uptake to soil and plant characteristics;nutrient assimilation and crop quality.
Microbial metabolism of organic chemicals in soil, both natural andxenobiotic. Decomposition of organic matter. Kinetics of microbial processes in soil.
Multidisciplinary analysis of energy and nutrient transfers within terrestrial ecosystems. Examination of processes and inter- and intra-system interactions between the atmosphere, biosphere, lithosphere and hydrosphere. Laboratory section uses biogeochemical simulation models to examine case studies.
Topics selected from studies of soil-forming processes, soil-geomorphic relations, mineral weathering, new developments in soil classification, and development of pedologic theory. Topics vary from year to year.
Global carbon cycle from Phanerozoic epoch to modern times. Examination of long and short-term carbon cycles.  Transfer of carbon among ocean, land and life with emphasis on humic substance formation, methods of characterization, reactions with organics and soil carbon stabilization.
Seminars and critical review of problems, issues, and research in soil science.
Group Study


Statistics and probability in daily life. Examines principles of collecting, presenting and interpreting data in order to critically assess results reported in the media; emphasis is on understanding polls, unemployment rates, health studies; understanding probability,risk and odds.
Random experiments; countable sample spaces; elementary probabilityaxioms; counting formulas; conditional probability; independence; Bayes theorem; expectation; gambling problems; binomial, hypergeometric, Poisson, geometric, negative binomial and multinomial models; limiting distributions; Markov chains. Applications in the social, biological, and engineering sciences.
Descriptive statistics; basic probability concepts; binomial, normal, Student's t, and chi-square distributions. Hypothesis testing and confidence intervals for one and two means and proportions. Regression. 
Descriptive statistics; basic probability concepts; binomial, normal, Student's t, and chi-square distributions. Hypothesis testing and confidence intervals for one and two means and proportions.  Regression.
Probability concepts; programming in R; exploratory data analysis; sampling distribution; estimation and inference; linear regression; simulations; resampling methods. Alternative to STA 013 for students with a background in calculus and programming.
Probability concepts; programming in R; exploratory data analysis; sampling distribution; estimation and inference; linear regression; simulations; resampling methods. Alternative to STA 013 for students with a background in calculus and programming.
Examination of a special topic in a small group setting.


Descriptive statistics, probability, sampling distributions, estimation, hypothesis testing, contingency tables, ANOVA, regression; implementation of statistical methods using computer package. 
Descriptive statistics, probability, sampling distributions, estimation, hypothesis testing, contingency tables, ANOVA, regression; implementation of statistical methods using computer package. 
Basic experimental designs, two-factor ANOVA without interactions, repeated measures ANOVA, ANCOVA, random effects vs. fixed effects, multiple regression, basic model building, resampling methods, multiple comparisons, multivariate methods, generalized linear models, Monte Carlo simulations.
Basic experimental designs, two-factor ANOVA without interactions, repeated measures ANOVA, ANCOVA, random effects vs. fixed effects, multiple regression, basic model building, resampling methods, multiple comparisons, multivariate methods, generalized linear models, Monte Carlo simulations.
Descriptive statistics; probability; random variables; expectation; binomial, normal, Poisson, other univariate distributions; joint distributions; sampling distributions, central limit theorem; properties of estimators; linear combinations of random variables; testing and estimation; Minitab computing package.
Descriptive statistics; probability; random variables; expectation; binomial, normal, Poisson, other univariate distributions; joint distributions; sampling distributions, central limit theorem; properties of estimators; linear combinations of random variables; testing and estimation; Minitab computing package. May be taught abroad.
Sign and Wilcoxon tests, Walsh averages. Two-sample procedures. Inferences concerning scale. Kruskal-Wallis test. Measures of association. Chi square and Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests.
Sign and Wilcoxon tests, Walsh averages. Two-sample procedures. Inferences concerning scale. Kruskal-Wallis test. Measures of association. Chi square and Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests.
Basics of experimental design. One-way and two-way fixed effects analysis of variance models. Randomized complete and incomplete block design. Multiple comparisons procedures. One-way random effects model. 
Basics of experimental design. One-way and two-way fixed effects analysis of variance models. Randomized complete and incomplete block design. Multiple comparisons procedures. One-way random effects model. 
Simple linear regression, variable selection techniques, stepwise regression, analysis of covariance, influence measures, computing packages.
Simple linear regression, variable selection techniques, stepwise regression, analysis of covariance, influence measures, computing packages.
Basic probability, densities and distributions, mean, variance, covariance, Chebyshev's inequality, some special distributions, sampling distributions, central limit theorem and law of large numbers, point estimation, some methods of estimation, interval estimation, confidence intervals for certain quantities, computing sample sizes.
Basic probability, densities and distributions, mean, variance, covariance, Chebyshev's inequality, some special distributions, sampling distributions, central limit theorem and law of large numbers, point estimation, some methods of estimation, interval estimation, confidence intervals for certain quantities, computing sample sizes.
Transformed random variables, large sample properties of estimates. Basic ideas of hypotheses testing, likelihood ratio tests, goodness-of-fit tests. General linear model, least squares estimates, Gauss-Markov theorem. Analysis of variance, F-test. Regression and correlation, multiple regression. Selected topics.
Transformed random variables, large sample properties of estimates. Basic ideas of hypotheses testing, likelihood ratio tests, goodness-of-fit tests. General linear model, least squares estimates, Gauss-Markov theorem. Analysis of variance, F-test. Regression and correlation, multiple regression. Selected topics.
Fundamental concepts of probability theory, discrete and continuous random variables, standard distributions, moments and moment-generating functions, laws of large numbers and the central limit theorem.
Fundamental concepts of probability theory, discrete and continuous random variables, standard distributions, moments and moment-generating functions, laws of large numbers and the central limit theorem.
Sampling, methods of estimation, bias-variance decomposition, sampling distributions, Fisher information, confidence intervals, and some elements of hypothesis testing.
Sampling, methods of estimation, bias-variance decomposition, sampling distributions, Fisher information, confidence intervals, and some elements of hypothesis testing.
Testing theory, tools and applications from probability theory, Linear model theory, ANOVA, goodness-of-fit.
Testing theory, tools and applications from probability theory, Linear model theory, ANOVA, goodness-of-fit.
Multivariate normal distribution; Mahalanobis distance; sampling distributions of the mean vector and covariance matrix; Hotellings T2; simultaneous inference; one-way MANOVA; discriminant analysis; principal components; canonical correlation; factor analysis. Intensive use of computer analyses and real data sets.
Multivariate normal distribution; Mahalanobis distance; sampling distributions of the mean vector and covariance matrix; Hotellings T2; simultaneous inference; one-way MANOVA; discriminant analysis; principal components; canonical correlation; factor analysis. Intensive use of computer analyses and real data sets.
Time series relationships; univariate time series models: trend, seasonality, correlated errors; regression with correlated errors; autoregressive models; autoregressive moving average models; spectral analysis: cyclical behavior and periodicity, measures of periodicity, periodogram; linear filtering; prediction of time series; transfer function models.
Time series relationships; univariate time series models: trend, seasonality, correlated errors; regression with correlated errors; autoregressive models; autoregressive moving average models; spectral analysis: cyclical behavior and periodicity, measures of periodicity, periodogram; linear filtering; prediction of time series; transfer function models.
Varieties of categorical data, cross-classifications, contingency tables, tests for independence. Multidimensional tables and log-linear models, maximum likelihood estimation; tests of goodness-of-fit. Logitmodels, linear logistic models. Analysis of incomplete tables. Packaged computer programs, analysis of real data.
Introduction to computing for data analysis and visualization, and simulation, using a high-level language (e.g., R). Computational reasoning, computationally intensive statistical methods, reading tabular and non-standard data.
Introduction to computing for data analysis and visualization, and simulation, using a high-level language (e.g., R). Computational reasoning, computationally intensive statistical methods, reading tabular and non-standard data.
Introduction to computing for data analysis & visualization, and simulation, using a high-level language (e.g., R). Computational reasoning, computationally intensive statistical methods, reading tabular & non-standard data.
Essentials of using relational databases and SQL. Processing data in blocks. Scraping Web pages and using Web services/APIs. Basics of text mining. Interactive data visualization with Web technologies. Computational data workflow and best practices. Statistical methods.
Essentials of using relational databases and SQL. Processing data in blocks. Scraping Web pages and using Web services/APIs. Basics of text mining. Interactive data visualization with Web technologies. Computational data workflow and best practices. Statistical methods.
High-performance computing in high-level data analysis languages; different computational approaches and paradigms for efficient analysis of big data; interfaces to compiled languages; R and Python programming languages; high-level parallel computing; MapReduce; parallel algorithms and reasoning. 
High-performance computing in high-level data analysis languages; different computational approaches and paradigms for efficient analysis of big data; interfaces to compiled languages; R and Python programming languages; high-level parallel computing; MapReduce; parallel algorithms and reasoning. 
Fundamental concepts and methods in statistical learning with emphasis on supervised learning. Principles, methodologies and applications of parametric and nonparametric regression, classification, resampling and model selection techniques.
Fundamental concepts and methods in statistical learning with emphasis on supervised learning. Principles, methodologies and applications of parametric and nonparametric regression, classification, resampling and model selection techniques.
Fundamental concepts and methods in statistical learning with emphasis on unsupervised learning. Principles, methodologies and applications of clustering methods, dimension reduction and manifold learning techniques, graphical models and latent variables modeling.
Fundamental concepts and methods in statistical learning with emphasis on unsupervised learning. Principles, methodologies and applications of clustering methods, dimension reduction and manifold learning techniques, graphical models and latent variables modeling.
Simple random, stratified random, cluster, and systematic sampling plans; mean, proportion, total, ratio, and regression estimators for these plans; sample survey design, absolute and relative error, sample size selection, strata construction; sampling and nonsampling sources of error.
Subjective probability, Bayes Theorem, conjugate priors, non-informative priors, estimation, testing, prediction, empirical Bayes methods, properties of Bayesian procedures, comparisons with classical procedures, approximation techniques, Gibbs sampling, hierarchical Bayesian analysis, applications, computer implemented data analysis.
Subjective probability, Bayes Theorem, conjugate priors, non-informative priors, estimation, testing, prediction, empirical Bayes methods, properties of Bayesian procedures, comparisons with classical procedures, approximation techniques, Gibbs sampling, hierarchical Bayesian analysis, applications, computer implemented data analysis.
Principles and practice of interdisciplinary, collaborative data analysis; complete case study review and team data analysis project. 
Principles and practice of interdisciplinary, collaborative data analysis; complete case study review and team data analysis project. 
Principles and practice of interdisciplinary, collaborative data analysis; complete case study review and team data analysis project. 
In-depth examination of a special topic in a small group setting.
Work experience in statistics.
Directed reading, research and writing, culminating in the completion of a senior honors thesis or project under direction of a faculty advisor.
Directed reading, research and writing, culminating in the completion of a senior honors thesis or project under direction of a faculty advisor.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.

Fundamental concepts of probability theory, discrete and continuous random variables, standard distributions, moments and moment-generating functions, laws of large numbers and the central limit theorem.
Sampling, methods of estimation, bias-variance decomposition, sampling distributions, Fisher information, confidence intervals, and some elements of hypothesis testing.
Testing theory, tools and applications from probability theory, Linear model theory, ANOVA, goodness-of-fit.
Testing theory, tools and applications from probability theory, Linear model theory, ANOVA, goodness-of-fit.
Introductory SAS language, data management, statistical applications, methods. Includes basics, graphics, summary statistics, data sets, variables and functions, linear models, repetitive code, simple macros, GLIM and GAM, formatting output, correspondence analysis, bootstrap. Prepare SAS base programmer certification exam.
Focus on linear statistical models widely used in scientific research. Emphasis on concepts, methods and data analysis using SAS. Topics include simple and multiple linear regression, polynomial regression, diagnostics, model selection, variable transformation, factorial designs and ANCOVA.
Focus on linear statistical models. Emphasis on concepts, method and data analysis; formal mathematics kept to minimum. Topics include simple and multiple linear regression, polynomial regression, diagnostics, model selection, factorial designs and analysis of covariance. Use of professional level software.
Linear and nonlinear statistical models emphasis on concepts, methods/data analysis using professional level software; formal mathematics kept to minimum. Topics include linear mixed models, repeated measures, generalized linear models, model selection, analysis of missing data, and multiple testing procedures.
Focus on linear and nonlinear statistical models. Emphasis on concepts, methods, and data analysis; formal mathematics kept to minimum. Topics include resampling methods, regularization techniques in regression and modern classification, cluster analysis and dimension reduction techniques. Use professional level software.
Optimization algorithms for solving problems in statistics, machine learning, data analytics. Review computational tools for implementing optimization algorithms (gradient descent, stochastic gradient descent, coordinate descent, Newtons method.)
High-performance computing in high-level data analysis languages; different computational approaches and paradigms for efficient analysis of big data; interfaces to compiled languages; R and Python programming languages; high-level parallel computing; MapReduce; parallel algorithms and reasoning.
Incomplete data; life tables; nonparametric methods; parametric methods; accelerated failure time models; proportional hazards models; partial likelihood; advanced topics.
Likelihood and linear regression; generalized linear model; Binomial regression; case-control studies; dose-response and bioassay; Poisson regression; Gamma regression; quasi-likelihood models; estimating equations; multivariate GLMs.
Standard and advanced methodology, theory, algorithms, and applications relevant for analysis of repeated measurements and longitudinal data in biostatistical and statistical settings.
Basic statistical principles of clinical designs, including bias, randomization, blocking, and masking. Practical applications of widely-used designs, including dose-finding, comparative and cluster randomization designs. Advanced statistical procedures for analysis of data collected in clinical trials.
Standard and advanced statistical methodology, theory, algorithms, and applications relevant to the analysis of -omics data.
First part of three-quarter sequence on mathematical statistics. Emphasizes foundations. Topics include basic concepts in asymptotic theory, decision theory, and an overview of methods of point estimation.
Second part of a three-quarter sequence on mathematical statistics. Emphasizes: hyposthesis testing (including multiple testing) as well as theory for linear models.
Third part of three-quarter sequence on mathematical statistics. Emphasizes large sample theory and their applications. Topics include statistical functionals, smoothing methods and optimization techniques relevant for statistics.
Estimation and testing for the general linear model, regression, analysis of designed experiments, and missing data techniques.
Alternative approaches to regression, model selection, nonparametric methods amenable to linear model framework and their applications.
Multivariate analysis: multivariate distributions, multivariate linear models, data analytic methods including principal component, factor, discriminant, canonical correlation and cluster analysis.
Topics from balanced and partially balanced incomplete block designs, fractional factorials, and response surfaces.
Measure-theoretic foundations, abstract integration, independence, laws of large numbers, characteristic functions, central limit theorems. Weak convergence in metric spaces, Brownian motion, invariance principle. Conditional expectation. Topics selected from: martingales, Markov chains, ergodic theory. 
Measure-theoretic foundations, abstract integration, independence, laws of large numbers, characteristic functions, central limit theorems. Weak convergence in metric spaces, Brownian motion, invariance principle. Conditional expectation. Topics selected from: martingales, Markov chains, ergodic theory. 
Measure-theoretic foundations, abstract integration, independence, laws of large numbers, characteristic functions, central limit theorems. Weak convergence in metric spaces, Brownian motion, invariance principle. Conditional expectation. Topics selected from: martingales, Markov chains, ergodic theory. 
Advanced topics in time series analysis and applications. Models for experimental data, measures of dependence, large-sample theory, statistical estimation and inference. Univariate and multivariate spectral analysis, regression, ARIMA models, state-space models, Kalman filtering.
Advanced topics in time series analysis and applications. Models for experimental data, measures of dependence, large-sample theory, statistical estimation and inference. Univariate and multivariate spectral analysis, regression, ARIMA models, state-space models, Kalman filtering.
Multivariate normal and Wishart distributions, Hotellings T-Squared, simultaneous inference, likelihood ratio and union intersection tests, Bayesian methods, discriminant analysis, principal component and factor analysis, multivariate clustering, multivariate regression and analysis of variance, application to data.
Comprehensive treatment of nonparametric statistical inference, including the most basic materials from classical nonparametrics, robustness, nonparametric estimation of a distribution function fromincomplete data, curve estimation, and theory of resampling methodology.
Comprehensive treatment of nonparametric statistical inference, including the most basic materials from classical nonparametrics, robustness, nonparametric estimation of a distribution function fromincomplete data, curve estimation, and theory of re-sampling methodology.
Topics in asymptotic theory of statistics chosen from weak convergence, contiguity, empirical processes, Edgeworth expansion, and semiparametric inference.
Essentials of statistical computing using a general-purpose statistical language. Topics include algorithms; design; debugging and efficiency; object-oriented concepts; model specification and fitting; statistical visualization; data and text processing; databases; computer systems and platforms; comparison of scientific programming languages. 
Numerical analysis; random number generation; computer experiments and resampling techniques (bootstrap, cross validation); numerical optimization; matrix decompositions and linear algebra computations; algorithms (markov chain monte carlo, expectation-maximization); algorithm design and efficiency; parallel and distributed computing. 
Resampling, nonparametric and semiparametric methods, incomplete data analysis, diagnostics, multivariate and time series analysis, applied Bayesian methods, sequential analysis and quality control, categorical data analysis, spatial and image analysis, computational biology, functional data analysis, models for correlated data, learning theory.
Topics may include Bayesian analysis, nonparametric and semiparametric regression, sequential analysis, bootstrap, statistical methods in high dimensions, reliability, spatial processes, inference for stochastic process, stochastic methods in finance, empirical processes, change-point problems, asymptotics for parametric, nonparametric and semiparametric models, nonlinear time series, robustness.
Biostatistical methods and models selected from the following: genetics, bioinformatics and genomics; longitudinal or functional data; clinical trials and experimental design; analysis of environmental data; dose-response, nutrition and toxicology; survival analysis; observational studies and epidemiology; computer-intensive or Bayesian methods in biostatistics. 
Principles and practice of interdisciplinary collaboration in statistics, statistical consulting, ethical aspects, and basics of data analysis and study design. Emphasis on practical consulting and collaboration of statisticians with clients and scientists under instructor supervision.
Guided orientation to original statistical research papers, and oral presentations in class of such papers by students under the supervision of a faculty member.
Seminar on advanced topics in probability and statistics.
Advanced study in various fields of statistics with emphasis in applied topics, presented by members of the Graduate Group in Statistics and other guest speakers.
Special topics in Statistics appropriate for study at the graduate level.

Research in Statistics under the supervision of major professor.
Practical experience in methods/problems of teaching statistics at university undergraduate level.  Lecturing techniques, analysis of tests and supporting material, preparation and grading of examinations, and use of statistical software.  Emphasis on practical training.  

Theoretically informed research in comparative history. Students read exemplary works and learn to frame their own research projects. Presentations include Center for History, Society, & Culture faculty and visitors discussing current research.
Interdisciplinary study of particular substantive problems in social theory and comparative history. Topics vary.
Participation in research workshops sponsored by the Center for Comparative Research for History, Society, & Culture.
Methodological issues concerning the historical, philosophical, sociological, ethical, and political analysis of science, technology, and medicine. Detailed case studies to illustrate different methods of analysis.
History of media from 1945 to present, with particular focus on the development of the computer, digital network and internet technologies in the context of other media infrastructures like radio, television and satellite networks.  Analysis of inter-related cultural/political topics.
Work experience off and on campus in all subject areas offered in the program in Science & Technology Studies under the supervision of a  member of the faculty. 

Historical and conceptual framework for contemporary debates about intellectual property and science. Topics include U.S. patent system and copyright law, interaction between patents and industrial policy, credit in academic and industrial science, role of IP in global knowledge politics.
Anthropological approaches to scientific visualization techniques, informatics, simulations. Examination of different visualization techniques toward understanding the work involved in producing them, critical assessment of their power and limits, especially when visualizations are used socially to make claims.
Introduction to critical medical anthropology. Topics include anthropological analysis of bio-medicine, psychiatry, systems of knowledge and healing, the body, emotions, and clinical encounters in a cross-cultural perspective. 
Recent works in medical anthropology and the science studies of medicine dealing with social and cultural aspects of global health issues such as AIDS, pandemics, clinical trials, cultural differences in illnesses, diabetes, organ trafficking, medical technologies, illness narratives, and others.
Evolution and demise of natural history as a discipline from Aristotleto Linnaeus. Considers ancient views of nature and its Renaissance rediscovery; the emergence of biology, botany, geology, and zoology; the history of taxonomy and classification.
Development of modern biology from pre-Darwinian roots to the present. Considers emergence of modern biological specialities and consolidation of biological theory around evolutionary ideas. History of allied fieldssuch as genetics, paleontology, embryology, ecology, systematics and molecular biology.
Students will explore the life and times of Charles Darwin and will trace the development of evolutionary thinking before and after the Origin of Species to appreciate its place in Victorian society and in the corpus of Darwins thought.
Cultural concepts of time; units and instruments of time measurement; historical differences in the social organization of time; and time measurement in 20th-century science.
Study of the ubiquitous presence of CCTV, face recognition software, global tracking systems, biosensors, and data mining practices that have made surveillance part of our daily life.  Exploration of the boundary between security and control, information and spying.
Texts and writing practices in the production of scientific knowledge.  Surveys the literary structure of scientific arguments; history of scientific genres; rhetoric and semiotics in scientific culture; graphical systems in the experimental laboratory; narratives of science, including science fiction. 
Critical approaches to the study of video games, focusing on formal, historical, and cultural modes of analysis. History of software and hardware in North American and global contexts. Relations of games to society, politics, economics, literature, media, and the arts.
The literary modes and methods of science fiction. Representative texts, authors, and themes of the genre - e.g., time travel, alternative universes, and utopias. Relations of science fiction to science, philosophy, and culture.
Hands-on training in Science & Technology Studies fieldwork, interviewing, archival research and data analysis. Review of laboratory studies literature, informed consent procedures, ethics, and care of the data. Individual and group projects possible. 
Social, cultural, and historical dimensions of knowledge, especially scientific knowledge. Problems, methods, and theory in sociology of scientific knowledge. Laboratory and historical case studies. Scientific and technical knowledge in institutional and organizational contexts.
In-depth treatment of selected topics in anthropology, history, philosophy, and sociology of science and related fields. Possible topics include science and society, science and power, scientific explanation, technology and culture, theory testing.
Intensive reading, discussion, research and writing by small groups in selected topics of science, technology, and medicine studies scholarship. Emphasis on individual research projects.
Work experience off and on campus in all subject areas offered in the program in Science & Technology Studies under the supervision of a  member of the faculty. 
Analysis of real-world data in the form of case studies engaging current issues. Emphasizes teamwork in the identification of problems and sources of relevant data; data cleaning, exploration, analysis, and visualization using R; and interpretation and presentation of results to a variety of stakeholders in oral, visual, and textual formats.


Interdisciplinary seminar in the history and philosophy of science. Focuses on issues such as historiography, methodology, and the conceptual foundations of science. 



Supervised work experience in general surgery and related fields.


Eight week general surgery clerkship includes GI, Burn, Oncology, Plastics, Vascular Cardiothoracic, consult, transplant and trauma.  Clerkship assignments are at UCDMC.  Daily core material presentations and reading assignments.  Student involvement includes work-up and care of surgical patients.
General surgery clerkship includes GI, Burn, Oncology, Plastics, Vascular Cardiothoracic, consult, transplant and trauma. Clerkship assignments are at UCSF Fresno. Student involvement includes work-up and care of surgical patients.
Surgery Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
Surgery Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
Surgery Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
Surgery Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
Surgery Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
Individual directed studies in extended preparation for modified curriculum or to complete a clinical rotation following a leave of absence.  
Individual directed studies in extended preparation for remediation of all or part of clinical rotation. Clinical studies to accommodate and satisfy remedial work as directed by the Committee on Student Progress and approved by the course IOR.  
Goal of the surgical skills boot camp didactic is to enable students to demonstrate competence in basic surgical skills and theory, using analytical thinking and hands-on simulation.
Rotation through Surgery Specialty Clinics:Vascular, GI, GU, Thoracic, Plastic, Radiotherapy. Student works up one new and two return visit patients. Presents consult to on-site faculty. Weekly review with preceptor and course director. Reading assignments to add perspective for in-depth discussions.
Student works as an extern on one of the two general surgery Trauma teams, participating in resuscitation and management of critically injured patients. Team hours consist of 24 hours on, and 24 hours off.
Student participates in direct supervision of critically ill surgical patients in a twelve-bed surgery ICU. Each student is closely supervised. Provides in-depth experience with management of critically ill patients.
Total involvement in patient care involving surgical preparation, treatment, operative care, and follow-up. Developing and understanding reconstruction and aesthetic plastic surgery. Microvascular surgery included. Student rotation.
Students actively participate in management of patients requiring surgery for cancer, endocrine disease and selected general surgical problems. Cases include malignant melanoma, sarcomas, gastrointestinal cancer, head and neck pathology, and metastatic malignancies. Attending rounds daily. Four teaching conferences weekly.
Student works as an extern on the Cardiothoracic Surgical Service, participating in perioperative management and operations on the heart, lungs, mediastinum, and other thoracic structures. Regularly scheduled teaching conferences are conducted.
Student participates on the GI Surgery Service, working under the immediate supervision of the faculty and surgical housestaff, involving the full spectrum of gastrointestinal diseases performed by the medical student.
Student participates on the vascular surgery service and in the management and operations of arterial and venous system, exclusive of diseases that require cardiopulmonary bypass for treatment. Includes patient care responsibilities with appropriate supervision.
Students actively participate in clinic and the operating room on colon and rectal patients.  This includes medical and surgical management.  Assignments involve work up and care of the surgical patients.
Care of patients with neonatal congenital surgical problems. Fluid and electrolyte management in infants. General experience with acquired surgical diseases in children.
Students function as acting interns working in parallel with the interns on the service. They consult on all non-trauma patients in the emergency room and on the wards and also participate in the operating room.
Anatomy of selected regions of the body using cadaver dissection, prosections and interactive CD ROMs. Anatomical relationships relevant to common surgical procedures. Surgical and interventional radiology procedures.
Student participates in the preoperative, operative and postoperative care of surgical patients under the supervision of attending staff.
Individualized activities, including ward rounds, subspecialty clinics and conferences, grand rounds, and observation of a variety of surgical procedures.
Case presentation of common clinical scenarios (i.e. chestpain/MI; fever/pneumonia; abdo pain/chlecy stites, etc.) from various discipline held in an auditorium with real patients exposure. Interactive session to review history, physical findings and case management. Students will be asked to perform H&P.
Special Study Module, a four-week course on the topic: Application of Basic Cardiopulmonary Physiology to Problems Encountered in Critically Ill Surgical Patients.
Special Study Module, a four-week course on the topic: Care of the Critically Ill Surgical Patient: Use of Physiological Principles to Guide Treatment of Patients with Common Surgical Problems.
In-depth study of gastrointestinal, hepatic and pancreatic cancer. Emphasis on an integration of basic science and clinical medicine. Participating departments include pathology, surgical oncology, medical oncology, gastroenterology, radiology and radiotherapy. 
To provide intensive and comprehensive training in surgery to students interested in a postgraduate surgical career, that would enable them to succeed during the internship and residency training.
Close contact with vascular surgeon for two-week period. Includes Sunday mornings. Physiology of going on and off cardiopulmonary bypass. Atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, structural and valvular heart disease and electrical and rhythmic heart disease.
Directed reading and discussion and/or laboratory investigation on selected topics.
Laboratory research on surgically related problems. Participation in projects to include the following: burn, nutrition, oncology, transplant and others.
Traditional and new forms of documentary, with focus on technocultural issues.  Skills and strategies for producing work in various media. Progression through all stages of production, from conception through post-production to critique. 
A survey of the use of sound, voice, noise, and modes of listening in the modernist, avante-garde, and experimental arts, from the late-19th century to the present. Focus on audiophonic and audiovisual technologies.
Social, political, economic, and aesthetic factors in virtual reality. Artificial environments, telepresence, and simulated experience. Focus on contemporary artists' work and writing.
Social, political, economic, and aesthetic factors in virtual reality. Artificial environments, telepresence, and simulated experience. Focus on contemporary artists' work and writing.
Workshop in advanced technocultural digital skills: Digital Imaging.
Workshop in advanced technocultural digital skills: Digital Video.
Workshop in advanced technocultural digital skills: Digital Sound.
Workshop in advanced technocultural digital skills: Web Design.
Workshop in advanced technocultural digital skills: Topics in Digital Production.
Lecture and intensive workshop teaching small-scale film production. Appointments as a(n) director, director of photography, actor, writer, lighting designer, sound designer and other critical positions are used to produce and submit a short film to a film festival.
Undergraduates assist the instructor by tutoring students in one of the department's regularly scheduled courses. 
Description of types of surveys commonly used in transportation demand modeling, including travel and activity diaries, attitudinal, panel, computer, and stated-response surveys. Discussion of sampling, experimental design, and survey design issues. Analysis methods, including factor, discriminant and cluster analysis.
Designed to prepare in the basics of thermodynamics, fluid mechanics and heat transfer as they relate to transportation.
Directed group study of special topics with instruction carried out through lecture or laboratory, or a combination of both. 
Directed group study of special topics with instruction carried out lecture or laboratory, or a combination of both. 
Research problems, progress, and techniques in transportation.
Supervised work experience in transportation studies. 



Work experience off campus in a textiles or clothing-related area. Supervision by a member of the Textiles & Clothing faculty.
Group Study
Social and cognitive factors influencing management and perception of personal appearance in everyday life. Concepts and methods appropriate to the study of meaning of clothes in social and cultural contexts.
Properties of fabrics as related to serviceability, comfort, and appearance.
Laboratory methods and procedures employed in studying properties of textile fabrics as related to serviceability, comfort, and appearance.
Basic principles of textile dyeing, printing, and finishing; color theory; structure, properties, and application of dyes and finishes; factors affecting application and fastness; maintenance of dyed and finished textiles.
Demonstrates various aspects of dyeing, printing, and finishing of textile substrates including the effect of fiber and finish type, andphysical and chemical variables on dyeing and finishing processes and on the properties of the resultant textile.
Overview of characteristics, technology, processes, and research in apparel manufacturing industries including study of government statistics, material utilization and fabrication, mechanization, management, and production engineering.
Physical processes involved in the production of textiles from the individual fiber to the finished fabric. Includes spinning, texturing, yarn formation, weaving preparation, weaving and knitting, tufting and fabric finishing.
The properties, characterization, and performance evaluation of clothing materials and structures for specific functional applications. Principles and methods related to wetting and transport properties, fabric hand and aesthetic properties, clothing comfort, and material and assembly technology.
Study of basic elements of fashion marketing including philosophy and objectives, organization, merchandising, pricing, promotion and personnel.
Structure of the global fiber/textile/apparel complex and its distribution patterns with an overview of political, economic and technological factors that are changing these industries and their markets.
Senior thesis on independent problems. Research begun in TXC 180A continued and completed in TXC 180B.
Senior thesis on independent problems. Research begun in TXC 180A continued and completed in TXC 180B.
Work-learn experience off campus in a textiles or clothing-related area. Supervision by a member of the Textiles & Clothing faculty.
Tutoring of students in Textiles & Clothing courses. Assistance with discussion groups and laboratory sections under supervision of instructor.
Examination of theories and research concerning relationships between clothing and human behavior with emphasis on research techniques, including methods of measuring clothing variables.
Individual faculty members meet with their graduate students. Critical presentations of original research are made by graduate students. Research activities are planned. Discussions are led by major professors for their research groups.
Critical reading and evaluation on selected topics of current interest in textiles. Multidisciplinary aspects of the topics selected will be stressed.
Teaching assistant, training practicum.

Introduction to ambulatory care of urologic patients including basic therapeutic and diagnostic procedures from case material referred toprivate clinic. Management of urinary tract infection will be emphasized.
Clinical experience in diagnosis and treatment of urologic disease. Student will work closely with house staff, participate in conferences and surgery, and perform initial patient evaluation on new patients.
Under supervision, student acting as intern will assume full inpatient responsibility including admission history, physical examination, management of hospitalization, and participate in surgical procedures, outpatient clinic and learning diagnostic and therapeutic procedures. 
Research in oncology, male infertility, urodynamics, neurogenic bladder. Unique opportunity to apply recent technologies (nuclear medicine resonance, flow cytometry, recombinant DNA) in investigation, diagnosis and treatment of GU cancer, infectious disease, male infertility and development of genitourinary bioprosthetics.
Introduction to reading and composing processes and key rhetorical concepts for academic literacies. Multiple drafts of composing projects in a variety of genres and modes with feedback from peers and the instructor.
Introduction to reading and composing processes and key rhetorical concepts for academic literacies. Multiple drafts of composing projects in a variety of genres and modes with feedback from peers and the instructor.
Introduction to reading and composing processes and key rhetorical concepts for academic literacies. Multiple drafts of composing projects in a variety of genres and modes with feedback from peers and the instructor.
Development of skills required for success in college-level writing across genres and disciplines. Integrates reading, critical thinking, and written communication, using texts from across the curriculum. 
Development of multilingual writers' composition and English language skills across genres and disciplines. Integrates college-level reading, critical thinking, and written communication, using texts from across the curriculum. 
Introduction to writing as an object of study and to theories and research in the field. Survey of how writing is created, disseminated, and used in private, public, and academic contexts. 
Examination of video games as rhetorical texts whose meaning is produced through complex interplay of procedures, narratives, rules, and context. Writing about video games using critical perspectives and analytic methods.
Reading and writing short multi-paragraph texts for academic purposes. Suitable for students whose primary home language was not English.
Reading and writing source/research-based texts for academic purposes. Suitable for students whose primary home language was not English.
Reading and writing source/research-based texts for academic purposes. Suitable for students whose primary home language was not English.
Writing skills necessary for upper division courses, including skills crucial to writing lab and project reports, summaries, critiques, abstracts, and responses to exam questions.  Includes practice with the syntax, grammar, and vocabulary characteristics of academic writing.
Instruction and practice in reading scientific and technical texts. Techniques for comprehending and analyzing grammatical and organizational patterns. Notetaking skills, summarizing, vocabulary enrichment.
Instruction in analyzing style of persuasive texts, using appropriate vocabulary, and applying English grammatical structures in argumentation. Suitable for multilingual students desiring additional instruction in persuasive English writing.
Reading and writing effectively in various research genres across the disciplines. Suitable for multilingual students desiring additional instruction in the linguistic and rhetorical features of research writing in English for academic purposes. 
Principles of style, language, and structure in the essay. Analysis and development of voice and genre, including sentence revision for force and clarity, and development of effective paragraphs and essays. 
Principles of research writing. Analysis and development of research topics and effective arguments, including critical reading, analysis, integration, and documentation of source material. 
Internships in fields where students can practice their skills.


Introduction to discipline of professional writing. Examination of writing as a social practice, using genre theory as a conceptual framework. Analysis of how genres function rhetorically in specific contexts and how social systems both shape and are shaped by genres.
Instruction in advanced principles of expository writing. Writing tasks within and beyond the University. Different writing modes, including narrative, analysis, explanation, argument, critique. May be taught abroad.
Advanced instruction in writing in that discipline and practice in effective styles of communication.
Advanced instruction in writing in biology. 
Advanced instruction in writing in history.
Advanced instruction in writing in international relations.
Advanced instruction in writing in engineering.
Advanced instruction in writing in food science & technology.
Advanced instruction in writing and practice in effective styles of communication in the fields of environmental study, policy, or advocacy.
Advanced instruction in writing and practice in effective styles of communication in Human Development & Psychology.  
Advanced instruction in cross-disciplinary writing about race and ethnicity and practice in effective styles of communication.  
Advanced instruction in writing about the arts and practice in effective styles of communication.  
Advanced instruction in writing and practice in effective styles of communication in Sociology and related academic and professional fields.
Advanced instruction in writing about film and practice in effective styles of communication.
Advanced instruction in writing in the Community & Regional Development discipline and practice in effective styles of communication.
Advanced instruction in writing and practice in effective styles of communication in Anthropology and related academic and professional fields.
Effective communication in and for organizations, including corporations, government agencies, and non-profit. Suitable for students entering careers such as management, public relations, and grant writing.
Effective communication in and for organizations, including corporations, government agencies, and nonprofit. Suitable for students entering careers such as management, public relations, and grant writing.
Advanced principles of critical thinking, argumentation, and style, with special emphasis on their application in the legal profession. Suitable for students planning careers in law, business, administration, or management.
Non-fiction for magazines and newspapers, with attention to style and language. Emphasis on research, interviewing, market analysis, and query letters.
Advanced expository writing in the contemporary American classroom. Strongly recommended for teaching credential candidates.
Writing abstracts, research proposals, scientific papers, other forms of scientific communication. Presenting data graphically. Primarily for students engaged in or planning careers in basic or applied research.
Advanced expository writing common in the health professions, emphasizing effective communication between the writer and different audiences. Topics relate to health, disability, and disease. Suitable for students planning careers in professions such as medicine, dentistry, physical therapy, optometry.
Advanced expository writing common in the health professions, emphasizing effective communication between the writer and different audiences. Topics relate to health, disability, and disease. Suitable for students planning careers in professions such as medicine, dentistry, physical therapy, optometry.
Advanced instruction in writing in the workplace, including public and private sectors, government agencies, profit and non-profit organizations. Collaborative work and practice in effective styles of communication. May be taught abroad.
Advanced instruction in writing for Social Justice, using an interdisciplinary approach combining feminist, critical race, ethnic, cultural, and transnational studies; practice in techniques of research and styles of communication for diverse audiences. Suitable for activists in community organizing, non-profits, politics.
Communicating effectively about technology and other technical subjects to varied audiences for varied purposes. Suitable for students entering professions that require communicating technical information to subject matter experts, managers, technicians, and non-specialists.   
Survey of present-day English grammar as informed by contemporary linguistic theories. The major syntactic structures of English; their variation across dialects, styles, and registers; their development; and their usefulness in describing the conventions of English.  
Instruction in the elements and practices of professional writing in specialized genres. May be taught abroad.
Instruction in the elements and practices of advanced journalism.
Instruction in the elements and practices of in-depth investigative journalism.
Instruction in the elements and practices of science journalism.
Introduction to general editing practices and principles, with an emphasis on professional editing in organizational contexts, including academia and the workplace. Extensive practice in copy, comprehensive, and collaborative editing.
History of scientific writing from the 17th century to the present; origins and evolution of scientific genres; role of scientific writing in producing scientific knowledge; discursive differences between disciplines; emergence of English as a global language of science.
Capstone course for majors. Synthesis and application of  rhetorical concepts learned in the major. Development of professional digital and print portfolio for graduate school and career applications.
Internships in fields where students can practice their skills. May be taught abroad.
Tutoring one-on-one or leading small voluntary discussion groups affiliated with a writing course.
Field experience, with individuals or in K-12 classroom instruction, focusing on reading- and writing-to-learn strategies in any subject area.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.

Using genre theory and methods of analysis to understand and prepare to do research on different types of writing in varying academic and professional contexts. Emphasis on problems in organizational, professional, and/or interdisciplinary communication.
Multi-skills ESL course designed to help international/ESL students improve their English language skills for successful academic study. Emphasis on writing, speaking, listening, reading, and academic culture.
Focuses on writing needed for academic work, including summaries, critiques, research and grant proposals, memos, resumes, and research papers. Includes a review of grammar needed for writing and some focus on reading skills and American vocabulary and idioms.
Focuses on writing needed for academic work, including summaries, critiques, research & grant proposals, memos, resumes, and research papers. Includes a review of grammar needed for writing and some focus on reading skills and American vocabulary and idioms.
Examines key testing and measurement concepts; the history of writing assessment; and relationships among writing tests and methods of teaching writing; the impacts of Information and Communication Technology (ICT), and how educational policies both drive and respond to writing assessments.
Examines how the physical qualities of texts offer different affordances during production and reception; grounds these discussions in the development of literacy practices and writing technologies from ancient to contemporary; creates frameworks for research into literacy, teaching, and textual technologies.
Traces the history of second language writing theory and research on second language writers in a variety of academic and professional contexts. Emphasis on writer characteristics, texts, and contexts. 


Intensive work in oral English for non-native English-speaking students, particularly international student teaching assistants, to increase fluency, accuracy, and use of appropriate discourse strategies in academic settings; e.g., seminar, discussion, laboratory.
Intensive work in oral English for non-native English-speaking students, particularly international student teaching assistants, to increase fluency, accuracy, and use of appropriate discourse strategies in academic settings; e.g., seminar, discussion, laboratory.
Discussion of problems related to teaching expository writing at the university level, with special emphasis on teaching reading and writing skills and responding to student papers.
Preparing teachers of university-level second language writers, whether in composition courses or courses in other disciplines with a substantial writing component. Suitable for graduate students and advanced undergraduates.

Introduction to current issues surrounding wine and health as they relate to diet, nutrition, and toxicology. 
Identification, cultivation, and use of the major wine, table, raisin, and rootstock cultivars. Includes practices specific to the fall such as fruit contracts, maturity sampling, harvesting, cover crops, and soil-pests. One field trip required.
Theory, principles, and practices of pruning and grapevine propagation.  Plant materials and the certification process, weed control and weed identification, wood diseases, and frost protection. One field trip required.
Field oriented experience in the principles and practices of grapevine production, including vineyard establishment, vine training, trellising, canopy management practices, irrigation and water management, and methods of crop adjustment for improvement of fruit quality. One field trip required.
Botanical aspects including morphology and domestication will precede lectures covering flower development and energy budget concepts. Impact of physiological variables such as photosynthesis translocation, mineral nutrition, and water relations on fruit ripening and composition will be covered.
Study of the diversity of viticulture, both geographical and historical. History of grape growing and its spread throughout the world will be covered, along with discussions of current viticultural practices in different parts of the world, including California.
Critical analysis of wines produced in different parts of the world with emphasis on the relationship between sensory properties of the wines and factors associated with their place of origin.
Landscape distribution, physical and chemical processes in viticultural soils. Site evaluation procedures, best soil management practices, vineyard fertilization, and soil health monitoring.
Physiology, biochemistry, and genetics of microorganisms important in food fermentations. How microorganisms are used in fermentations and how raw materials are converted into finished fermented foods and beverages.
Overview of the raisin and table grape industries in California and other production areas of the world. Cultural practices associated with raisin and table grape production will also be discussed.
Various pests and diseases of vineyards throughout California. Pest/disease identification and control methods (to include sampling techniques) also will be discussed. Integrated management approach to pest control methods will be emphasized.
Fundamental principles of analytical chemistry as they relate to specific methods used in winemaking.  
Fundamental principles of analytical chemistry as they relate to specific methods used in winemaking. Laboratory exercises demonstrating various chemical, physical and biochemical methods. Data will be analyzed and results interpreted in weekly lab reports; includes student-designed independent project and written report.
Principles and practices of making standard types of wines, with special reference to grape varieties used and methods of vinification.
Current technologies used in production of California table wines; analysis and monitoring of impact of fermentation variables on microbial performance and product quality; student-designed independent research project.
Principles of sensory evaluation and application to wines. Factors influencing wine flavor, data from sensory analysis of model solutions. 
Sensory evaluation of wines and model systems using discrimination tests, ranking, descriptive analysis and time-intensity analysis. Data will be analyzed by appropriate statistical tests and the results interpreted in extensive weekly lab reports.
Principles of equilibria and rates of physical and chemical reactions in wines; treatment of unstable components in wines by adsorption, ion exchange, refrigeration, filtration, and membrane processes; and protein, polysaccharide, tartrate, oxidative and color stabilities.
Practical application of principles of equilibria and rates of physical and chemical reactions to wine stability.
Sensory and chemical impact of processing on wines; bench-scale analytical results to make and implement processing decisions; principles and theories of equipment operation and scale-up.
Nature, development, physiology, biochemistry and control of yeasts and bacteria involved in the making, aging and spoilage of wine.
Nature, development, physiology, biochemistry and control of yeasts and bacteria involved in the making, aging and spoilage of wine.
Process technologies and process systems that are used in modern commercial wineries. Lectures, demonstrations, problem solving sessions, and possible field trips. Includes grape preparation and fermentation equipment; post-fermentation processing equipment; winery utilities, cleaning systems, and waste treatment.
Distillation principles and practices; production technology of brandy,whiskey, rum, vodka, gin, and other distilled beverages; characteristics of raw materials, fermentation, distillation, and aging.
Critical evaluation of selected monographs in enology. Discussion leadership rotates among the students.
Outside speakers on a specific winemaking topic chosen for the quarter. Discussion with the speaker hosted by the faculty member(s) in charge.
Work experience related to Fermentation Science (Enology) or Plant Science (Viticulture) majors. Internships must be approved and supervised by a member of the department or major faculty, but are arranged by the student.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.

Processes involved in conducting scientific research. Topics covered will include conducting literature review, formulating hypotheses, and analyzing and reporting results. Students will complete an annotated bibliography and complete a written and oral research proposal.
Anatomy, physiology and biochemistry of grape berry development, with emphasis on the development of grape composition relevant to winemaking.
Experimental design and statistical analysis, including multivariate analysis, for both sensory and instrumental data in enology and food-related studies.
Application of plant, meteorological, soil, water, GIS, and economic sciences to sustainable vineyard development. Preparation of a comprehensive study to determine the viticultural and economic feasibility of a given site for raisin, table, or wine grape production.
Principles and practices used to evaluate agricultural soils in the field, including soil pits, soil cores, electrical conductivity meters, ground penetrating radar, geomorphology and surface terrain analysis. Use of geographic information sciences, soil databases, digital elevation models and geostatistics.
Structure, occurrence, and changes due to wine production to the natural products found in wine. Chemicals with a sensory impact will be emphasized, including flavonoids and other phenolics, terpenes and norisoprenoids, pyrazines, oak volatiles and other wine constituents.
Theory and practice of instrumental analysis of wines and musts.  mphasis on the principles of analytical techniques (e.g., CE, GC, HPLC, Mass Spectrometry) and factors determining correct choice of instrumental method.
Selected topics in the science and technology of winemaking. Topics will be drawn from current research of participating enology and viticulture faculty. Critical analysis of the technical content of published material will be emphasized.
Sensory descriptive analysis experiments will be designed and conducted using standard sensory science methods.Data will be analyzed by analyses of variance, principal component analyses and generalized Procrustes analysis to evaluate the judges performance and interpret the significance of the results.
Design of wineries. Includes process calculations, equipment selection, process layout and building choice and siting. Project scheduling, capital costs, and ten-year cash flow analysis for the winery. One field trip required.
Contemporary research topics in biological sciences. Discussion of recent research articles in a special topic area chosen by instructor. Intended to develop skills in critical evaluation of scientific publications.  

Planning and results of research programs, proposals, and experiments. Discussion and critical evaluation of original research being conducted by the group. Discussion led by individual research instructors for research group.
Critical evaluation of scientific and popular literature on selected topics of current interest that relate viticulture to fruit or wine sensory attributes or quality.  
Work experience related to Fermentation Science (Enology) or Plant Science (Viticulture) majors. Internships must be approved and supervised by a graduate group faculty member or students major professor, but are arranged by the student.
Designed for graduate students who desire teaching experience, but are not teaching assistants. Student contact primarily in laboratory or discussion sections, and under direction of a faculty member.



Research
Outline expectations and skill set required to participate successfully in the DVM curriculum as well as providing learning opportunity in communication, team-building, leadership, conflict management, stress management, critical thinking, professional behaviors, history taking, physical examination skills and medical record keeping.
Essential basic information regarding histology, general pathology, biochemistry, pharmacology and population health that is foundational to all blocks.
The lexicon, morphology, production, structure and function of peripheral blood cells, their bone marrow precursors and the lymphoid system, the process and regulation of hemostasis, and the laboratory evaluation of all of these in health and disease. 
Anatomy, histology, and physiology necessary for understanding form and function of the bones, joints, muscles, and tendons in producing locomotion; and the pathologic processes that produce typical responses to injury of musculoskeletal structures in domestic animals.
Establish a basis for clinical neurology, ophthalmology, and behavior by providing an integrated study of normal neurobiology, neuroanatomy, neurophysiology, neuropathology, neurpharmacology, neurotoxicology, ophthalmology and behavior.
Examine interrelatedness and functions of the organs associated with the gastrointestinal tract.  Applied problems in pharmacology, physical examination, diagnostic testing, and imaging are used to reinforce a basic understanding of organ anatomy, physiology, pathophysiology, and nutrition/metabolism.
Basic principles of nutrition and toxicology as well as pathophysiologic changes, diagnostic procedures and treatments of nutritional diseases and intoxications of domestic animals and wildlife. Incorporate case examples and directed self-learning to reinforce important concepts.
Integrate basic and preclinical material working with senior student in a clinical environment.
Normal cardiovascular and respiratory system biology and the integrated response of those systems to injury or disease.
Examine and explore the normal morphology (gross and microscopic), physiology, pathology and imaging of the upper and lower urinary tract in multiple species.
Anatomy and histology of endocrine glands and reproductive systems in males and females.  Understand the physiology and pathology at the molecular, cellular and organismal level.
Structure and function of the skin and specialized keratinized structures in veterinary species. Review mechanisms by which skin responds to perturbations and discuss wound healing and skin pathology.
Basic mechanisms, etiology, causes and the approach to diagnosis and treatment of cancer with emphasis on veterinary patients.
Integrate immunology, microbiology, virology, parasitology of common infectious, zoonotic and foreign animal diseases.
Principles of evidence-based medicine, study design and inference, and disease transmission in populations. Topics include biostatistics, outbreak investigation and response, diagnostic tests, vaccine strategies, food safety, foreign animal diseases, and impact of environmental health on animals and humans.
Essential concepts that are shared across year three blocks to include foundational material in anesthesia, surgery and emergency medicine with cases that include interpretation of clinical pathology and imaging.
Integrate basic and preclinical material working with a senior student in a clinical environment.
Continue to build on foundations from freshman year in communication, history-taking, client interactions, team-building, conflict and stress management and professional behaviors.
Longitudinal stream to include law, ethics, regulatory medicine, business, communication and disaster medicine.
Introduction to surgical anatomy, operative and anesthetic skills.
Approach commonly encountered diseases and medical problems across multiple species.  Development of problem-solving skills related to the medical problems of all species from the level of individual animals to groups/herds/populations.
Approach commonly encountered diseases and medical problems across multiple species. Development of problem-solving skills related to the medical problems of all species from the level of individual animals to groups/herds/populations.
Approach commonly encountered diseases and medical problems across multiple species. Development of problem-solving skills related to the medical problems of all species from the level of individual animals to groups/herds/populations.
Clinical manifestations, diagnostic methods, and the medical and surgical approaches to the infectious, musculoskeletal, neurologic and ophthalmologic diseases of small animals. 
Clinical manifestations, diagnostic methods, and the medical and surgical approaches to the dermatologic, dental, and gastrointestinal diseases of small animals as well as preventative medicine and nutrition.
Clinical manifestations, diagnostic methods, and the medical and surgical approaches to the cardiorespiratory, endocrine, and urinary medicine as well as diagnosis and therapy of oncologic diseases in small animals. Introduction to companion, avian, and exotic pet medicine and surgery.  
Fundamentals of entry level large animal medicine and surgery to promote development of problem-solving skills for diagnosis, treatment and control of various disease conditions.
Continuation of fundamentals of entry level large animal medicine and surgery to promote development of problem-solving skills for diagnosis, treatment and control of various disease conditions.
Fundamental and advanced levels of equine medicine, surgery, lameness and reproduction. Focus on management of individual equids.
Fundamental and advanced levels of livestock medicine and surgery of individual animals and population health. Focus on all livestock species including cattle, sheep, goats, pigs and poultry.
Taxon- and topic-based approach to learning zoological medicine. Anatomy, physiology, nutrition, management, anesthesia, medicine, surgery and pathology on non-domestic free-ranging and captive species.
Fundamental understanding of the etiology, clinical presentation, diagnostic evaluation, treatment, prevention, and control of medical diseases of companion small exotic mammals.
Organized by organ systems to present reptile and avian health issues. Overview of applied anatomy, physiology and clinical pathology of common species will be provided through laboratory opportunities and discussion of common diseases and treatments. 
Introduction to practical poultry medicine. Gross pathology, biosecurity and basic diagnostic tests.  Visits to hatcheries, broiler, layer and turkey farms.
Basics of laboratory animal medicine including diseases, medicine, and surgery and comparative biology of the most common species and introduction to regulations. Combination of lecture, wet labs, and projects.
Develop professional communication and business skills that are directly applicable in veterinary clinical practice by actively participating in a wide variety of interactive learning opportunities.
Application of problem-solving and microscopy skills to laboratory data and laboratory specimens.  Sections  to include hematology, immunology, body fluids, exfoliative cytology, urinalysis, microbiology and clinical chemistry data and interpretation.
Work experience off and on campus in all subject areas offered in the Department of Molecular Biosciences.  Internships supervised by a member of the faculty.
Online course provides training in core concepts of pharmacological and toxicological sciences and prepares to develop higher-order problem solving and critical thinking skills.
Hybrid course provides training in core concepts of pharmacological and toxicological sciences. Develop higher-order problem solving and critical thinking skills.
Work experience off and on campus in all subject areas offered by the Department of Molecular Biosciences. Internships supervised by a member of the faculty.
General principles of neurotoxicology, the cell and molecular mechanisms and health impacts of specific neurotoxicants and the contribution of neurotoxic compounds to complex neurodevelopmental disorders and neurodegenerative diseases.
Significance/chemical pathways of toxicants and drug metabolism, enzymology and molecular aspects of P450 and flavin monooxygenases, hydrolases and phase 2 transferases and experimental approaches for metabolism studies.
Survey of structure and function of the respiratory system, the pathophysiology of major lung diseases, the interactions of toxicants with the lung and response of this organ to injury.
Topics in nutrition, pharmacology/toxicology, and biochemistry.
Assist in preparation and teaching of courses in Nutrition, Pharmacology and Toxicology, or other courses offered by the department under direct supervision of the instructor. Designed for graduate or professional students who desire teaching experience in graduate courses.
Experience in professional curriculum for graduate or professional students, not teaching assistants, under direct supervision of instructor.
Internship at Knights Landing One Health Center (KLOHC) for undergraduate pre-veterinary student. Application of veterinary and One Health concepts to their work at the center.
Internship at Knights Landing One Health Center (KLOHC) for undergraduate pre-veterinary students. Interns may offer technical help, assist with patient registration and records, animal handling, and foreign language interpretation.
Introduction to the dynamics and control of infectious disease in wildlife, including zoonotic diseases and those threatening endangered species. Basic epidemiological models and application to field data. Scientists' role in developing disease control policies.
Clinical and epidemiologic properties and application of diagnostic tests for disease, with emphasis on selecting tests; validating, evaluating, and interpreting new tests individually and in aggregate; determining cutoff values; and developing testing strategies.
Participatory seminar addressing the mechanisms of retroviral pathogenesis in a journal club format. Focus on the review of current scientific journal papers concerning viral pathogenesis, immunology and virology with a special focus on retroviruses.
Presentation, analysis and discussion of primary literature on the dynamics and control of infectious disease in wildlife, including zoonotic diseases and those threatening endangered species. Multidisciplinary approach combines perspectives of ecology and veterinary medicine.
Group study in selected areas of the clinical sciences.


Group study. 

Internship in Washington, DC with associated, supervised research project. 
Core academic component of Washington Program. Topics coordinated with internships. Research draws on resources uniquely available in Washington, DC. Supervised preparation of extensive paper.
Work experience off and on campus in all subject areas offered in thedepartment. Internships supervised by a member of the faculty.
Special study for undergraduates.
Introduction to field methods for monitoring and studying wild vertebrates and their habitats, with an emphasis on ecology and conservation. Required weekend field trips.
Field research in ecology of wild vertebrates in terrestrial environments; formulation of testable hypotheses, study design, introduction to research methodology, oral and written presentation of results.  Limited enrollment.
Field research in ecology of wild vertebrates in terrestrial environments; testing ecological hypotheses through field research, application of research methodology, supervised independent research projects. Held between Labor Day and fall quarter.
Emphasis on theory of quantitative fish capture methods and design of individual research projects on ecology, behavior, physiology or population biology of fishes.
Field investigations of fish biology are emphasized including quantitative capture methods and individual research projects on ecology, behavior, physiology or population biology of fishes at the field site in relation to their habitats.
Introduction to basic statistical concepts and methods as tools for fish and wildlife research. Application of general guiding principles of developing research questions and projects, basic probability theory, statistical estimation (correlation, regression, ANOVA, Chi-square test) and hypothesis testing. Introduction of some specialized analytical techniques, such as population dynamics modeling and time series analysis. 
Origins, evolution, diversification, and geographical and ecological distributions of mammals. Morphological, physiological, reproductive, and behavioral adaptations of mammals to their environment.
Laboratory exercises in the morphology, systematics, species identification, anatomy, and adaptations of wild mammals to different habitats.
Phylogeny, distribution, migration, reproduction, population dynamics, behavior and physiological ecology of wild birds. Emphasis on adaptations to environments, species interactions, management, and conservation.
Laboratory exercises in bird species identification, anatomy, molts, age and sex, specialized adaptations, behavior, research, with emphasis on conservation of wild birds. Several weekend field trips, after class bird walks, and independent bird study are required.
Evolution, ecology, and conservation of marine and freshwater fishes.
Morphology, taxonomy, conservation, and identification of marine and freshwater fishes with emphasis on California species. 
Comparative physiology, growth, reproduction, behavior, and energy relations of fishes.
Description of bird, mammal and fish population dynamics, modeling philosophy, techniques for estimation of animal abundance (e.g., mark-recapture, change-inratio, etc.), mathematical models of populations (e.g., Leslie matrix, logistic, dynamic pool, stockrecruitment); case histories.
Introduction to major statistical modeling approaches for estimating animal population parameters, including: sample counts, distance sampling, repeated point counts (N-mixture modeling), capture-mark-recapture for closed and open populations, static and dynamic occupancy modeling, and richness estimation. Methods are embedded in the context of obtaining reliable estimates of abundance, survival, occurrence and other ecological parameters for management and conservation. 
Ecology and natural history of the tropics. Challenges and opportunities associated with tropical conservation. Design and communicate course-based research project. 
Principles of physiological ecology, emphasizing vertebrates. Ecological, evolutionary, and behavioral perspectives on physiological mechanisms used by animals to adapt to their environment, including consideration of climate-change and other threats to biodiversity. Tropical, temperate, and polar ecosystems are highlighted.
Evolution and ecology of the worlds diverse reptiles and amphibians. Emphasis on adaptations to environments, species interactions, management, and conservation.
Diagnostic characteristics and functional attributes of amphibians and reptiles, emphasizing ecological, bio-geographic and phylogenetic patterns. Field experience with common species of reptiles and amphibians in the Davis area. 
Detailed examination of distribution, behavior, population dynamics, and management of waterfowl and upland game birds.
Basic theories underlying the functional and evolutionary significance of behavior, and the role of ecological constraints. Supporting empirical evidence taken mainly from studies of wild vertebrates.  
Key differences between marine and terrestrial ecosystems, major stressors of marine ecosystems (e.g., fisheries, pollution, bioinvasions, climate change and habitat destruction) and their consequences. Laws and agencies responsible for addressing problems, and the policies used.
Introduction to the behavior, ecology, and evolution of wild animals in urban environments. Effects of urbanization on disease, fitness, and dynamics of animal populations. Conservation and conflict management efforts in urban settings.
Ecology of wild vertebrates, including habitat selection, spatial organization, demography, population dynamics, competition, predation, herbivory, energetics, and community dynamics, set in the context of human-caused degradation of environments in North America.
Ecological approaches to managing wild vertebrates that come into conflict with agriculture, public health, or the conservation of biodiversity.
Various forms of environmental pollution in relation to fish and wildlife, the effects and mechanisms of pollutants, effects on individuals and systems, laboratory and field ecotoxicology, examples/case histories, philosophical/management considerations.
Introduction to conservation biology and background to the biological issues and controversies surrounding loss of species and habitats.
Analysis of the characteristics of wildlife and fish habitats, the conservation of habitats, and restoration. 
Analysis of the characteristics of wildlife and fish habitats, application of restoration methods, and evaluation of conservation and restoration projects in the field. Participate during the term in a restoration project.
Survey of the geographical distribution of vegetation types and habitats, with consideration of the environmental and historical factors that determine these patterns. Conservation and management approaches. Analytical field and lab techniques introduced. 
Overview of coastal ecosystems, physical and biological elements and processes, and coastal zone dynamics, including sandy, rocky and muddy shorelines, estuaries, dunes and coastal watersheds. Discussion of the role of historical factors and conservation, restoration, and management approaches.
Introduction to the dynamics and control of infectious disease in wildlife, including zoonotic diseases and those threatening endangered species. Basic epidemiological models and their applications. Role of scientists in developing disease control policies.
Evolutionary and ecological significance of coloration in mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, fish, cephalopods, crustaceans, spiders, insects, humans as well as color in fashion, plants and the military. Topics include history, protective coloration, warning coloration, mimicry, sexual dichromatism and color change.
Ecological responses to current and expected future climate change, across levels of biological organization from individuals to ecosystems.
Reports and discussions of recent advances related to wildlife and fisheries biology.
Principles and methods required to preserve and present biological specimens for research, teaching collections, and museums.
Work experience off and on campus in all subject areas offered in thedepartment. Internships supervised by a member of the faculty.
Critique and practice of research methods applied to field and/or laboratory environments of wild vertebrates. Work independently or in small groups to design experimental protocol, analyze data, and report their findings.
Experience in teaching under guidance of faculty member.
Influences of concepts of animal behavior (functional, evolutionary, developmental, mechanistic, and methodological issues) on conservation biology theory and practice.
Logical basis for population models, evaluation of simple ecological models, current population models with age, size, and stage structure, theoretical basis for management and exemplary case histories. Emphasis on development and use of realistic population models in ecological research.
Seminar devoted to a highly specific research topic in any area of wildlife or fisheries biology. Special topic selected for a quarter will vary depending on interests of instructor and students.
Weekly conference on research problems, progress and techniques in wildlife and fishery sciences.
Presentation and analysis of assigned topics in aquatic ecology emphasizing fish, fisheries and aquatic conservation.
Seminar devoted to current topics concerning the physiological functioning of fishes.
Presentation and analysis of research papers on social and foraging behavior of predatory animals, antipredator strategies of prey species, co-evolution of predators and prey, and ecology of predator prey interactions.
Presentation and analysis of assigned and searched research papers on transport, exposure, and effects of environmental contaminants on wildlife-associated ecosystem components, especially at individual/population levels. Specific subjects vary each offering.
Tutoring and teaching students in undergraduate courses in Wildlife, Fish, & Conservation Biology. Weekly conferences with instructor; evaluations of teaching; preparing for and conducting demonstrations, laboratories, and discussions; preparing and grading examinations.


Introduction to the emergence of feminist theory and to key concepts in feminist theorizing. Examination of past and current debates over sexuality, race, identity politics, and the social construction of womens experience.
Introduction to feminist applications and transformations of traditional disciplinary research practices;  initial training in methodologies for feminist interdisciplinary work.
Interpretations of poststructuralist, postmodern, and postcolonial thought from a critical feminist perspective; includes methods of applying theory to concrete social/cultural problems of gender, race, sexuality, class.
Transnational perspectives on 20th- and 21st-century womens movements in Western, colonial and post-colonial contexts, examining movements forms and political orientations and relationships between womens movements and other forces for change.
Applies a critical gender perspective to militarism as manifest in contexts of military rule, war, conflict, peacebuilding and security post-conflict. Addresses the changing configurations of gender and sexuality in military institutions and militarized economies and cultures from an interdisciplinary perspective.
Media production as a mode of cultural criticism, furthering feminist/ social justice activist goals. Fundamentals of camera, editing and distribution via a social engagement model. Study and hands-on response to key historic and contemporary feminist and social justice media discourses.
Study of queer sexualities, identities, theories, practices. Alternative sexualities as historical, social, and cultural constructions in intersections with race, gender, class, nationality. Interdisciplinary exploration of sexual liberation and the regulation of sexuality through history, theory and expressive cultural forms.
Life narrative writings by women. Transgressive voices exploring issues of race, class, and sexuality, women's silence and marginalization. Theories of autobiography, autoethnography and memoir included.
Writings by women from diverse regions and cultures, understood in their cultural, socio-economic, and historical contexts, with each course offering a focus on womens writing in specific geographic/national locations and their diasporas: The Arab World.
Introduction to debate/discourses about women and Islam. Transformations in debate/discourses in colonial and postcolonial periods in the Middle East & South Asia. Comparative study of debate/discourses on family, work, law, sexuality, religion, comportment, human rights, feminist and religious movements.  
Supervised internship and study in positions/institutional settings dealing with gender-related problems or issues, as for example, a women's center, affirmative action office, advertising agency, or social welfare agency. Final written report on internship experience.
In consultation with an advisor, students complete a substantial research paper or significant creative project on a Womens Studies topic.
In consultation with an advisor, students complete a substantial research paper or significant creative project on a Women's Studies topic.
Leading small, voluntary discussion groups affiliated with a Womens Studies course.


Application of feminist theoretical perspectives to the interdisciplinary investigation of a problem or question chosen by the instructor(s).
Interdisciplinary approaches to understanding the social and culturalconstruction of masculinities; attention to the effects of biology, gender, race, class, sexual and national identities; criticism of oral, printed, visual, and mass mediated texts, and of social relations and structures.


