AAS 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

AAS 100
Survey of Ethnicity in the US
Upper division standing or consent of instructor.Limited enrollment.
Sociological and historical analysis of the experience, culture, and relations of and between groups considered racial and/or ethnic minorities in the United States.
AAS 101
Introduction to Research in the Afro-American Community
AAS 010;  or Consent of Instructor.
Introductory survey of Afro-American Studies methods and techniques; problems and methodology in Afro-American Studies.
AAS 107A
African Descent Communities & Culture in the Caribbean & Latin America
Upper division standing.
Origin and development of African descent communities and cultures in the Caribbean, and Latin America. Similarities and differences among African descent communities and cultures in terms of religious practices, music, and national identity.  
AAS 107B
African Descent Communities & Culture in North America
Upper division standing.
Study of the origin and development of African descent communities and cultures in the U.S.A., Canada, and Mexico.  
AAS 111
Cultural Politics in Contemporary Africa
AAS 012;  or upper division standing.
Themes and style of new cultural forms in Africa as displayed in art, music, film and writing, especially in regard to blending of indigenous and foreign influences. Social and political forces shaping contemporary cultural expression.
AAS 123
Black Female Experience in Contemporary Society
Upper division standing or consent of instructor.
Black female social, intellectual, and psychological development. Black women's contributions in history, literature, and social science; life experiences of Black women and philosophical underpinnings of the feminist movement.
AAS 133
The Black Family In America
Upper division standing or consent of instructor.
Analysis of social science research to examine relationship between black (African-descent) family structures, patterns of functioning, and political, economic, and social conditions in the U.S.
AAS 141
Psychology of the African American Experience
AAS 010;  or Consent of Instructor.  Upper division status.
Introduction to the psychological issues faced by African Americans. Description of any disparities in mental health care experienced by African American and Diaspora populations in the United States.  Analysis of issues from European/Western and Afrocentric frame of reference. Emphasis on Optimal Theory, a psychological theory based on an Afrocentric world view.
AAS 145A
Black Social & Political Thought
AAS 010 or AAS 080;  or Consent of Instructor.
Exploration and analysis of Black social and political thought in the Americas.
AAS 145B
Black Intellectuals
(AAS 010,  AAS 080,  AAS 145A);  or Consent of Instructor.
Exposition and critical analysis of selected theoretical writings of Black intellectuals, and especially political and social thinkers, in the Americas.
AAS 150A
Afro-American Visual Arts Tradition: A Historical & Cultural Study
Upper division standing.
Afro-American visual arts tradition, folk and formal, in historical and cultural context, from 1600 through Reconstruction.
AAS 150B
Afro-American Visual Arts Tradition: A Historical & Cultural Study
Upper division standing.
Afro-American visual arts tradition, folk and formal, in historical and cultural context, from Reconstruction to the present.
AAS 152
Major Voices in Black World Literature
AAS 010 or AAS 012 or AAS 018;  Upper division standing.
Recurrence of cultural tropes in the works of major black world authors and formation of an African-oriented canon. Principal activities include critical reading and discovery of literature as a cultural resource.
AAS 153
African Literature
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Colonial and post-colonial sub-Saharan African literature and the African oral traditions from which it emerged. Genres and themes of African literature from the 19th century to the present.
AAS 156
Language & Identity in Africa & the African Diaspora
AAS 012;  Or upper division standing.
Relationship between language and identity in literature from Africa and the African Diaspora. Use of pidgins, Creoles, translation from African languages and impact of language policies.
AAS 157
Literature & Society in South Africa
Upper division standing.
Political and social developments in 20th-century South Africa as illustrated by a range of South African writing. Response of different writers to race relations, impact of government policy on types and context of writing.
AAS 160
African-American Folklore
AAS 010.
Theory and history of African American folklore and folklife, includingmusic, material culture, oral narrative, proverbs, and humor. African and Caribbean cultural influences on New World folk genres will be probed.
AAS 162
Islam in Africa & the Americas
RST 060 or AAS 012 or AAS 110.
Comparative and historical survey of Islam in the regional and cultural settings of Sub-Saharan Africa and the Americas.
AAS 163
African Religions in the Americas
AAS 010;  AAS 015;  or Consent of Instructor.
Comparative study of African religious heritage in the Americas: Jamaica, Trinidad, Cuba, U.S.A., Haiti, and Brazil. Emphasis on the origins and development of Candomble, Santeria, Shango, Vodun, andRastafarianism in the New World.
AAS 165
Afro-Christianity & the Black Church
AAS 010;  AAS 015;  or Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Examination of the historical role of Christian belief and practice as well as the institution of the Black Church in the experience of African Americans, from slavery to the present.
AAS 168
Black Documentary: History & Practice
FMS 001;  AAS 170;  and Consent of Instructor.  AAS 050 recommended.
Study of Black documentary history and understanding of the use of the documentary form for political purposes. Discussion of documentary theory. Each student, singly or in a team, will create and carefully edit a documentary project.
AAS 169
History of African American Television
AAS 050 recommended.
History of the representation of African Americans in television; how the representations reflect social and political forces in American society.  Role of African Americans in actively shaping their representation.
AAS 170
African-American Film & Video
FMS 001;  AAS 050 recommended.
Comparative approach in the study of fictional film and video dealing with the African American experience drawing on film and cultural studies to examine and discuss selected works.
AAS 171
Black African & Black European Film & Video
AAS 015 or AAS 050 or ENL 160 or ENL 162;  or Consent of Instructor.
Comparative approach in the study of dramatic films and videos that treat black life in Africa and Europe. Critical attention focused on the imaginative construction of ethnicity, race, nationality, gender, and sexuality in each particular work.
AAS 175A
Black Documentary: History & Theory
FMS 001;  AAS 170;  AAS 050 recommended.
Black documentary history and documentary theory. Use of black documentary for political purposes.  
AAS 175B
Black Documentary Practicum
AAS 175A;  and Consent of Instructor.
Creation of documentary projects, with students working in production crews. 
AAS 176
The Politics of Resources
AAS 012 or AAS 110.Limited enrollment.
Examination of the ways in which the processes of the extraction, purification and use of natural resources and the complex regimes of valuation and commodification they (re)produce lead to cooperation and conflict in contemporary Africa and beyond.
AAS 178
African Modernity & Globalization
AAS 012;  or Consent of Instructor.Limited to 80 students.
Exploration of modernity and globalization and their dimensions and impacts in/on Africa. Examination of modern necessities and constrains in Africa in relation to (neo)colonialism, transnational encounters, technology,  gender, risk, ritual, identity, culture, etc.
AAS 181
Hip Hop in Urban America
Upper division standing or consent of instructor.Must have Junior or Senior level standing.
History, aesthetics, urban context, and economics of hip-hop in the US, and its globalization. Hip-hop's four artistic elements-rap, deejaying, breakdance, and aerosol art-allow the examination of issues of race, ethnicity, and gender in youth culture and American society.  
AAS 182
Hip Hop Culture & Globalization
AAS 181 preferable, not required.
Investigation of hip-hop youth cultures outside the United States using globalization and Cultural Studies theories. Analysis of international hip-hop sites in Africa, Asia, Europe, South America, and the Middle East through reading, discussion, and visiting virtual sites.
AAS 185
Topics in African American Film
AAS 170;  AAS 050 recommended.
Intensive study of special topics in African American film.  
AAS 190
Topics in African & African-Diaspora Studies 
Upper division standing in African American & African Studies (AAS) courses or consent of instructor.
Intensive treatment of a special topic or problem in African or African Diaspora Studies.
AAS 192
Internship in African-American & African Studies
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of 12 units of upper division study in African American & African Studies (AAS) courses; upper division standing.Restricted to African American & African Studies majors and minors.
Supervised internship in community, government, or private institutions, in all subject areas offered by the African American & African Studies Program.
AAS 197T
Tutoring in Afro-American Studies
Consent of major committee; upper division standing with major in African American & African Studies.
Leading of small voluntary discussion groups affiliated with one of the department's regular courses.
AAS 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.
AAS 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

AAS 201
Critical Foundations in African American Studies
Graduate standing.
Introduction to history of African American Studies. Topics include: research agendas, policy implications, debates, crises, and institutional frameworks.
AAS 202
Critical Foundations in African Studies
Graduate standing.
Introduction to the history and current organization of African Studies as area of intellectual investigation. Offers an opportunity to review research agenda and policy implications, debates, crises, and institutional frameworks surrounding the production of knowledge about Africa.
AAS 298A
Directed Group Study in African American & African Diaspora Studies
Graduate standing.
Group study.
ABG 200A
Integrated Animal Biology I
BIS 101;  or Consent of Instructor.  Or equivalent course; graduate standing.Limited to 20 students; Pass One restricted to Animal Biology Graduate Group students.
Natural history, management, historical and current uses, and specialized disciplinary features of model and novel animal systems used in research. Development of conceptual approaches in organismal biology to improve experimental design and interpretation of interdisciplinary research studies.
ABG 200B
Integrated Animal Biology II
ABG 200A.Limited enrollment; Pass One restricted to Animal Biology Graduate Group students.
Natural history, management, historical and current uses, and specialized disciplinary features of model and novel animal systems used in research. Development of conceptual approaches in organismal biology to improve experimental design and interpretation of interdisciplinary research studies. 
ABG 202
Grant Procurement & Administration
ABG 200B.Limited to 12 graduate students; Pass One restricted to Animal Biology Graduate Group students.
Topics include: structure of grants, attention to specifications, concise persuasive writing, and grant budgeting. Identify grant opportunities, write a persuasive research grant proposal, and administer grants.
ABG 205
Advanced Nutritional Energetics
(ABI 102,  ABI 103,  NPB 101);  or the equivalent courses.Limited to 30 students.
History of nutritional energetics. Evaluation of energy transformations associated with food utilization. Energy expenditures at cellular, tissue, and animal levels as affected by diet and physiological state. Current and future feeding systems.
ABG 211
Advances in Animal Biotechnology & Genetics
NPB 121;  BIS 101;  or Consent of Instructor.Pass One restricted to graduate students.
Introduction to advanced techniques used for assisted reproductive technologies in mammals and birds, genetic engineering, gene editing, stem cell biology. Offered in alternate years. 
ABG 250
Mathematical Modeling in Biological Systems
MAT 016A;  MAT 016B;  STA 100;  Or equivalents required; graduate standing; MAT 016C or equivalent recommended; more than one course in statistics recommended; ABI 102 or BIS 102 recommended or equivalent course in biochemistry.Limited enrollment.
Model development and evaluation including sensitivity analyses using R. Four principle modeling methodologies included: algebraic functions of biological processes, physiological-based compartmental models, linear programming and meta-analysis. Fundamental background and understanding of mathematical modeling principles in biological systems.
ABG 255
Physiology of the Stress Response
Graduate standing.
Definition of Stress; Physiological mechanisms of adaptation to stress; Hormonal control of the systemic stress response; Mechanisms of the cellular stress response; Discussion of current trends in stress physiology and current methods for studying the stress response.
ABG 290
Seminar in Animal Biology
Graduate standing.
Seminar on advanced topics in animal biology. Presentations by members of the Animal Biology Graduate Group and guest speakers.
ABG 290C
Research Conference
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Student presentations of research in Animal Biology and discussions among participating students and Animal Biology faculty.  
ABG 298
Group Study in Animal Biology
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

ABG 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Research with a faculty member in Animal Biology Graduate Group.
ABG 300
Methods in Teaching Animal Biology
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Practical experience in the methods and problems of teaching animal biology. Includes analysis of laboratory exercises, discussion of teaching techniques, grading scientific essays, preparing for and conducting discussion or laboratory sections, formulating quiz and exam questions under instructor supervision. 
ABG 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

ABI 050B
Animal Biology 
BIS 001A;  BIS 001B (can be concurrent).
Basic biological disciplines important to an understanding of practical animal biology issues including the evolution of animal groups, geneticmechanisms, animal physiology as it relates to maintenance and production, and aspects of comparative anatomy, behavior and ecology.
ABI 050C
Animal Biology
BIS 001B;  BIS 001C;  ABI 050A;  ABI 050B.
Animal management and conservation. Societal concerns arising frommanagement and conservation issues, including economics, aesthetics, regulations, safety, public perspectives and advocacy
ABI 092
Intership in Animal Biology
Consent of Instructor.
Office, laboratory or fieldwork off or on campus in research, governmental regulation, policy making, and private enterprise dealing with animal related issues of production, welfare, pest management, biodiversity and the environment. All requirements of Internship Approval Request form must be met.
ABI 102
Animal Biochemistry & Metabolism
(CHE 002A,  CHE 002B,  CHE 008A,  CHE 008B) or (CHE 118A,  CHE 118B).
Water and biological buffers; thermodynamics of metabolism; structure and function of biomolecules; enzyme kinetics and function; membrane biology; digestion and absorption; carbohydrate metabolism.   
ABI 103
Animal Biochemistry & Metabolism
ABI 102 or BIS 102.
Physiological function and metabolism of lipids and amino acids; integrative metabolism; biochemical basis for nutrient requirements; structure and function of vitamins; mineral metabolism and requirements.
ABI 189
Senior Practicum
ABI 050A;  ABI 050B;  ABI 050C;  ABI 187;  Junior standing.
Practicum may be an experimental research project, a library research project or some other creative activity that will serve as a capstone experience for the Animal Biology major.
ABI 189D
Senior Practicum Discussion
ABI 050A;  ABI 050B;  ABI 050C;  ABI 187;  ABI 189 (can be concurrent);  Junior standing.
Helps prevent or solve problems during the students' senior practicum activity.
ABI 192
Internship in Animal Biology
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of 84 units.
Office, laboratory or fieldwork off or on campus in research, governmental regulations, policy making, and private enterprise dealing with animal related issues of production, welfare, pest management, biodiversity and the environment. All requirements of Intership Approval Request form must be met.
ABT 052
Field Equipment Welding
ABT 016;  or Consent of Instructor.
Intermediate welding to include hardfacing and inert gas welding. Class projects on repair and fabrication by welding. Troubleshooting and major repair of field equipment.
ABT 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

ABT 099
Special Study for Lower Division Students
Consent of Instructor.

ABT 101
Engine Technology
Upper division standing or consent of instructor.
Principles of 2-stroke cycle, 4-stroke cycle gasoline and 4-stroke cycle diesel engine construction and operation. Engine systems, performance, troubleshooting, and overhaul.
ABT 110L
Experiments in Food Engineering
FST 110B (can be concurrent).
Use of temperature sensors; measurement of thermal conductivity and heat transfer in foods; refrigeration, freezing, concentration and dehydration of foods.
ABT 121
Animal Housing & Environment Management
ANS 001 or ANS 002.
Optimal structures and environments for animal growth and comfort; heat and moisture transfer principles; heating, cooling, ventilating principles and equipment; animal housing design; environmental regulations and waste management practices.
ABT 161
Water Quality Management for Aquaculture
BIS 001B;  MAT 016B;  CHE 002B.
Basic principles of water chemistry and water treatment processes as they relate to aquacultural systems.
ABT 163
Aquaculture Systems Engineering
ABT 161.
Design of aquacultural systems: design methodology, principles of fluid mechanics, site selection and facility planning, management operations, computer modeling.
ABT 165
Irrigation Practices for an Urban Environment
PHY 001A.
Basic design, installation, and operation principles of irrigation systems for turf and landscape: golf courses, parks, highways, public buildings, etc. Emphasis on hardware association with sprinkler and drip/trickle systems.
ABT 181N
Concepts & Methods in Geographic Information Systems
ABT 150;  LDA 150;  or Consent of Instructor.
Data representation and analysis in geographic information systems (GIS). Creation of spatial data sets from analog and digital sources such as aerial photography and maps; data structures, data management, database design, georeferencing, georectification, surface models, analysis, and spatial data visualization.
ABT 182
Environmental Analysis Using GIS
ABT 150 or LDA 150;  Or equivalent GIS experience and skills; general biology and/or ecology courses recommended.
Ecosystem and landscape modeling with emphasis on hydrology and solute transport. Spatial analysis of environmental risk analysis including ecological risk assessment, natural resource management. Spatial database structures, scripting, data models, and error analysis in GIS.
ABT 190C
Research Conference for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.
Research conferences for specialized study in applied biological systems technology.
ABT 192
Internship in Applied Biological Systems Technology
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing; approval of project prior to period of internship.
Supervised internship in applied biological systems technology.
ABT 197T
Tutoring in Applied Biological Systems Technology
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Tutoring individual students, leading small voluntary discussion groups, or assisting the instructor in laboratories affiliated with one of the department's regular courses.
ABT 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.
ABT 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

ABT 212
Path to Zero Net Energy
Consent of Instructor.Open to upper division or graduate students.
Zero Net Energy concepts and social, technical, economic, and environmental considerations. Multidisciplinary research and analysis for clients.
ABT 233
Pest Control Practices
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Practical and theoretical considerations of pest control systems and techniques.  Design, selection, and use of mechanical systems for field, orchard, greenhouse, and vector control use.  Biological, legal, and environmental considerations in pest control and pesticide application.
ABT 289A
Selected Topic in Applied Biological Systems Technology: Agricultural & Natural Resources
Consent of Instructor.
Special topic.
ABT 289B
Selected Topics in Applied Biological Systems Technology: Biotechnology
Consent of Instructor.
Special topic.
ABT 289C
Selected Topics in Applied Biological Systems Technology: Food Technology
Consent of Instructor.
Special topic.
ABT 290C
Graduate Research Conference
Consent of Instructor.
Research problems, progress, and techniques in applied biological systems technology.
ABT 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

ABT 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.

ABT 317
Teaching Agricultural Mechanics
A course in physics; 6 units related to agricultural mechanics; enrolled in Agricultural Education Teacher Credential Program.
Preparation of the teacher to plan, organize, and conduct an agricultural mechanics program in secondary schools. Development of and presentation of lesson plans and teaching aids. Review of subject matter in metal fabrication, power and machinery and agricultural structures areas.
ACC 203
Intermediate Financial Reporting
ACC 201 or (MGB 200A or MGP 200A or MGT 200A).Restricted to students enrolled in the Master of Professional Accountancy degree program.
Focuses on the preparation of complex financial statements. Topics include accounting recognition, measurement, and disclosure, as well as the theoretical foundations of and motivations for financial reporting choices.
ACC 205
Advanced Financial Reporting
ACC 203.Restricted to graduate students in Graduate School of Management.
Advanced treatment of recognition, measurement, and disclosure including pensions, accounting for income taxes, mergers and acquisitions, consolidations, special-purpose entities, and foreign subsidiaries. Includes accounting for governmental and nonprofit entities, as well as advanced treatment of international accounting standards.
ACC 213
Intermediate Tax Reporting & Analysis
ACC 211;  (MGB 264 or MGP 264 or MGT 264).Restricted to graduate students in the Graduate School of Management.
Detailed analysis of federal taxation of individuals. Topics include the timing of income recognition, deductions and credits for tax purposes, as well as the basics of property transactions.
ACC 215
Advanced Tax Reporting & Analysis
ACC 213.Restricted to graduate students in Graduate School of Management.
Advanced treatment of complex tax transactions and entities. Topics include aspects of federal taxation of entities and the applicable impact upon individual taxpayers. Coverage includes basis analysis as applicable to pass through entities and an introduction to professional responsibilities.
ACC 217
Taxation of Individuals, Property, & Estates
ACC 213.Restricted to graduate students in Graduate School of Management.
In-depth analysis of individual income tax issues and property transactions including non-taxable exchanges, compensation, gifts, and transfer taxes. Expanded analysis of multistate tax issues. Emphasis is on the interrelationships of complex individual transactions as well as planning techniques. 
ACC 219
Taxation of Business Entities
ACC 213.Restricted to graduate students in Graduate School of Management.
Analysis of detailed business entity tax issues including basis calculations, alternative minimum taxation, multistate and multinational taxation, stock transactions, and mergers and acquisitions. Tax planning for entities and relationships between business entities and their owners.
ACC 231
Analysis & Use of Accounting Reports
ACC 203.Restricted to students enrolled in the Master of Professional Accountancy degree program.
Evaluation of complex financial accounting reports by managers and persons outside the firm, such as investors, creditors, and financial analysts. Topics include cash flow vs. income measurement, ratio and valuation analysis, and the effects of international accounting standards.
ACC 241
Auditing & the Accounting Profession  
ACC 201;  (MGB 200A or MGP 200A or MGT 200A).Restricted to Graduate School of Management students.
Introduction to the audit environment, professional standards, the accounting profession, and the professional responsibilities of accountants. Integrate audit topics across the areas of financial, cost, tax and systems accounting. 
ACC 243
Auditing & Attestation Services
ACC 241.Restricted to graduate students in Graduate School of Management.
Advanced treatment of the audit process and environment. Topics include audit planning and performance, evidence, internal controls, professional standards, and audit reports. Reviews, compilations and attestation services are examined, as are governmental agency audits.
ACC 251
Managerial Accounting & Controls
ACC 201;  (MGT 200A or MGP 200A or MGB 200A).Restricted to graduate students in the Graduate School of Management.
Analysis of management accounting systems including cost accounting, performance measurement, and compensation and reward systems. Focuses on the production of information useful for managerial decision-making, as well as the design of these systems. 
ACC 253
Accounting Information & Control Systems
ACC 201;  (MGT 200A or MGP 200A or MGB 200A).Restricted to graduate students in Graduate School of Management.
Analysis of information systems used for accounting, recordkeeping, and control. Topics include the regulatory requirements of accounting control systems as well as their implementation and auditing considerations.
ACC 261
Communications for Professional Accountants
ACC 201;  (MGT 200A or MGB 200A or MGP 200A).Restricted to graduate students in the Graduate School of Management.
Overview of written and oral professional communications with an emphasis on structuring and documenting audits and reports, understanding audiences (investors, creditors, regulators, and other stakeholders), and consideration of ethical and regulatory responsibilities.
ACC 271
Accounting Ethics
ACC 201;  (MGT 200A or MGP 200A or MGB 200A).Restricted to Graduate School of Management students.
Analysis of accountants' professional responsibilities and ethics. Topics include the behavioral foundations of ethics in a business environment, how those elements affect accountants' integrity, objectivity, and independence. Professional standards related to accountants' conduct are also covered.
ACC 455
Audit Data Analytics
ACC 253.
Analytical techniques and methods as related to the practice of financial statement auditing. Combines theory and the application of auditing professional standards including diagnosing problems and issues, analyzing relevant information, and reporting decision results and recommendations.
AED 092
Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.
Supervised internship off and on campus in areas of agricultural education.
AED 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study. 
AED 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.
AED support moved to ANS, informed July 2018 by Lisa Holmes. Subject moved in ICMS, took some time. 
AED 100
Concepts in Agricultural & Environmental Education
Upper division standing.
Philosophy and nature of formal and non-formal agricultural and environmental education programs. Emphasis on understanding the role of the teacher and observing a variety of programs.
AED 171
Audiovisual Communications
Upper division standing.
Theory and principles of audiovisual communications. Comparison of audiovisual materials such as transparencies, slides, computer- generated graphics, and videos. Operation and use of audiovisual equipment is stressed.
AED 172
Multimedia Productions
AED 171 recommended.
Design and production of educational, technical, and professional multimedia presentations. Instructional or professional presentations using a variety of media, including slides, video, transparencies, and computer-generated graphics.
AED 192
Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Supervised internship off and on campus in areas of agricultural education.
AED 300
Directed Field Experience in Teaching
AED 100.
Experience as teaching assistant in agriculture or home economics programs in public schools.
AED 301
Planning for Instructional Programs
AED 100;  AED 300 (can be concurrent).
Major paradigms in program planning and development. Emphasis on key steps in curriculum development, including selection and organization of educational objectives, learning experiences and teaching materials andresources.
AED 302
Teaching Methods in Agricultural Education
AED 100;  AED 300 (can be concurrent).
Development of teaching strategies with special emphasis on the designing of learning experiences, instructional execution, and use of teaching aids in agricultural education.
AED 306A
Field Experience with Future Farmers of America & Supervised Experience Programs
AED 306B (can be concurrent);  Acceptance into a teacher education program.
Develop an understanding of the Future Farmers of America and supervised occupational experience programs through planning, conducting, and evaluating actual programs.
AED 306B
Field Experience in Teaching Agriculture
AED 306A (can be concurrent);  AED 100;  AED 300;  AED 301;  AED 302;  and Consent of Instructor.  Acceptance into a teacher education program.
Directed teaching including supervision of occupational experience programs and youth activities in secondary schools or community colleges.
AED 323
Resource Development: Agricultural Education
AED 306A;  AED 306B.
Selection and implementation of community resources in teaching.
AED 390
Seminar: Issues in Agricultural Education
AED 306A;  AED 306B;  Acceptance into a teacher education program.
Discussion and evaluation of current issues, theories and research in agricultural education.
AGC 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
The chemistry and biochemistry of foods, nutritional chemicals, pesticides, and other special topics as they apply to agricultural and environmental chemistry.
AHI 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to lower division students.

AHI 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

AHI 100
Methods of Art History
Prior completion of two upper-division Art History (AHI) courses recommended.
Methods of art historical research and analysis, and general issues in critical thought. Writing skills appropriate to a range of art-historical exposition.  
AHI 148
Theory & Criticism: Painting & Sculpture
ART 005 or 007 recommended.
Study of forms and symbols in historic and contemporary masterpieces.
AHI 153
Hindu Gods & Hindu Symbols
RST 068: Hinduism or RST 069: Hindu Mythology recommended, but not required.
A historical survey of the development of the language of symbolism and iconography in Hinduism.
AHI 155
The Islamic City
AHI 001E recommended.
Introduction to the urban history of the Islamic world. Critical study of the historiography of the Islamic city, development of urban form, institutions and rituals, and analysis of selected themes.
AHI 156
Arts of the Islamic Book
Prior completion of AHI 001E recommended.
Critical study of the arts of the luxury book in the pre-modern Islamic world. Representation in Islam, the relationship of word and image, the discipline of calligraphy, aesthetics and representation in Persianate painting.
AHI 183A
Art in the Age of Revolution, 1750-1850
Prior completion of AHI 001C recommended.
Emergence of modernism in Europe from the late l8th century to the middle of the l9th century. Major artistic events viewed against a revolutionary backdrop of changing attitudes toward identity, race, and gender.
AHI 183B
Impressionism & Post-Impressionism: Manet to 1900
Prior completion of AHI 001C recommended.
Innovations of Impressionists, Post-Impressionists, and Symbolists in relation to social changes. Assessment of role of dealers and critics, myth of the artist-genius, and gender relations in French art and culture of the late 1800s.
AHI 184
20th-Century Architecture
Prior completion of AHI 025 recommended.
Major movements in architecture of the 20th century in Europe and America. Formal innovations are examined within the social, political, and economic circumstances in which they emerged.
AHI 190A
Undergraduate Seminar in Art History: Mediterranean Antiquity
Art History major, minor, or other significant training in Art History recommended.Limited to 25 students; for majors, minors, other advanced students.
Study of a broad problem or theoretical issue in art, architecture, or material culture. Intensive reading, discussion, research, writing. 
AHI 190B
Undergraduate Seminar in Art History: Medieval
Art History major, minor, or other significant training in Art History recommended.Limited to 25 students; for majors, minors, other advanced students.
Study of a broad problem or theoretical issue in art, architecture, or material culture. Intensive reading, discussion, research, writing. 
AHI 190C
Undergraduate Seminar in Art History: Renaissance
Art History major, minor, or other significant training in Art History recommended.Limited to 25 students; for majors, minors, other advanced students.
Study of a broad problem or theoretical issue in art, architecture, or material culture. Intensive reading, discussion, research, writing.
AHI 190D
Undergraduate Seminar in Art History: American
Art History major, minor, or other significant training in Art History recommended.Limited to 25 students; for majors, minors, other advanced students.
Study of a broad problem or theoretical issue in art, architecture, or material culture. Intensive reading, discussion, research, writing.
AHI 190E
Undergraduate Seminar in Art History: Gendering of Culture
Art History major, minor, or other significant training in Art History recommended.Limited to 25 students; for majors, minors, other advanced students.
Study of a broad problem or theoretical issue in art, architecture, or material culture. Intensive reading, discussion, research, writing. 
AHI 190F
Undergraduate Seminar in Art History: Chinese
Art History major, minor, or other significant training in Art History recommended.Limited to 25 students; for majors, minors, other advanced students.
Study of a broad problem or theoretical issue in art, architecture, or material culture. Intensive reading, discussion, research, writing.
AHI 190G
Undergraduate Seminar in Art History: Japanese
Art History major, minor, or other significant training in Art History recommended.Limited to 25 students; for majors, minors, other advanced students.
Study of a broad problem or theoretical issue in art, architecture, or material culture. Intensive reading, discussion, research, writing. 
AHI 190H
Undergraduate Seminar in Art History: Modern-Contemporary
Art History major, minor or other significant training recommended.Limited to 25 students; for majors, minors, other advanced students.
Study of a broad problem or theoretical issue in art, architecture, or material culture. Intensive reading, discussion, research, writing.
AHI 190I
Undergraduate Seminar in Art History: 17th-18th Century
Art History major, minor, or other significant training in Art History recommended.Limited to 25 students; for majors, minors, other advanced students.
Study of a broad problem or theoretical issue in art, architecture, or material culture. Intensive reading, discussion, research, writing.
AHI 190J
Undergraduate Seminar in Art History: Islamic
Art History major, minor, or other significant training in Art History recommended.Limited to 25 students;  for majors, minors, other advanced students.
Study of a broad problem or theoretical issue in art, architecture, or material culture. Intensive reading, discussion, research, writing.
AHI 190K
Undergraduate Seminar in Art History: 19th Century
Art History major, minor, or other significant training in Art History recommended.Limited to 25 students; for majors, minors, other advanced students.
Study of a broad problem or theoretical issue in art, architecture, or material culture. Intensive reading, discussion, research, writing. 
AHI 190L
Undergraduate Seminar in Art History: Architecture & Heritage
Art History major, minor, or other significant training in Art History recommended.Limited to 25 students; for majors, minors, other advanced students.
Study of a broad problem or theoretical issue in art, architecture, or material culture. Intensive reading, discussion, research, writing.
AHI 192
Internship
Consent of Instructor.
Supervised program of internships at professional art institutions such as museums, galleries, and art archives including collections of slides and photographs.
AHI 194H
Special Study for Honor Students
AHI 190;  Or the equivalent, as determined by the major advisor.
Open only to students in the Art History Honors Program. Independent study of an art historical problem culminating in the writing of an honors thesis under the supervision of a faculty guidance committee.
AHI 194H
Special Study for Honor Students
AHI 190;  Or the equivalent, as determined by the major advisor.
Open only to students in the Art History Honors Program. Independent study of an art historical problem culminating in the writing of an honors thesis under the supervision of a faculty guidance committee.
AHI 194HA
Honors Thesis Research
Consent of Instructor.  A minimum GPA of 3.7 and completion of one undergraduate seminar in Art History (AHI 190A-L).Only open to Art History majors with a minimum 135 units toward graduation. 
Research and initial drafting of a senior thesis paper in a scholarly area of Art History, under supervision of Art History faculty advisor. 
AHI 194HB
Honors Thesis Writing
AHI 194HA A- or better;  Consent of Instructor.Only open to majors in the Art History Honors Program with upper division standing.
Final writing of a senior thesis paper in a scholarly area of Art History, under supervision of Art History faculty advisor. 
AHI 200C
Thesis Writing Colloquium
AHI 200B;  Taken by all Art History M.A. students in their first year.Restricted to graduate students in Art History.
Meeting concurrently with AHI 200B, the colloquium provides a structured, supportive environment for second-year Art History graduate students drafting masters' theses. Offers a forum for technical discussions, discussion of writing/editing procedures, and peer review of writing in progress.
AHI 210
Museums, Art Exhibitions & Culture
Graduate status in art history or an allied field.Limited to 20 students.
Issues accompanying the evolution and function of museums from cabinets of curiosities in 16th-century Europe to modern art centers. Examination of divergent motives behind collecting, exhibiting, and interpretation of objects. Investigation of museums' historical legacies and continuing philosophical dilemmas. 
AHI 292
Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate student.Restricted to graduate students in Art History only.
Supervised internship at professional art or cultural institution including museum, galleries, archives, government offices, visual resources libraries, etc. 
AHI 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum 
Graduate standing.

AMS 004
Freshman Seminar
Open only to students who have completed fewer than 40 quarter units.Limited to 25 students.
Investigation of a special topic in American Studies through shared readings, discussions, written assignments, and special activities (such as fieldwork, site visits). Emphasis on student participation in learning.
AMS 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

AMS 125
Corporate Cultures
Consent of Instructor.
Exploration of the small group cultures of American corporate workplaces, including the role of environment, stories, jokes, rituals, ceremonies, personal style, and play. The effects of cultural diversity upon corporate cultures, both from within and in contact with foreign corporations.
AMS 190B
Senior Thesis
AMS 190A;  Consent of Instructor.
In consultation with advisor, student writes an extended research paper on a topic proposed in AMS 190A.
AMS 192
Internship in American Institutions
Consent of Instructor.  Enrollment dependent on availability of intern positions, with priority to American Studies majors.
Supervised internship and study within and about key organizations in American civilization at archives, museums, schools, historical societies, governmental and social agencies, etc., with attention to the techniques of participant obersvation and the collection of ethnographical data.
AMS 192
Internship in American Studies
Consent of Instructor.  Enrollment dependent on availability of intern positions, with priority to American Studies majors.
Supervised internship and study in social & community organizations, schools, cultural institutions (e.g., libraries, museums, and archives), or other work sites. Final written report and other assignments as per contract with supervisor.
AMS 197T
Tutoring in American Studies
Consent of Chairperson of American Studies Program.
Tutoring in lower division American Studies courses, usually in small discussion groups. Periodic meetings with the instructor in charge; reports and readings.
AMS 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

AMS 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of instructor and chairperson of American Studies Program.

AMS 220
American Folklore & Folklife
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Theory and methods for the study of the folklore and the folk customary behavior of Americans; contributions of folklore studies to scholarship in humanities and social science disciplines.
AMS 250
Cultural Study of Masculinities
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Interdisciplinary approaches to understanding the social and cultural construction of masculinities; attention to the effects of biology, gender, race, class, sexual and national identities; criticism of oral, printed, visual, and mass mediated texts, and of sicial relations and structure.
AMS 255
Food in American Culture
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.Graduate standing or advanced undergraduate with consent of instructor.
Interdisciplinary theories and methods for the study of food in American culture; food studies in relation to issues of identity (age, gender, ethnicity, religion, region, etc.), social relations, systems of production, and cultures of consumption.
AMS 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Graduate standing.

ANB 201
Scientific Approaches to Animal Behavior Research
Consent of Instructor.
Philosophical issues, goals, strategies and tools in field and laboratory research. 
ANB 210
History of Animal Behavior
Consent of Instructor.
Classic, seminal papers in animal behavior. Discussion of readings and broader historical context in which papers were written.
ANB 218A
Fundamentals of Animal Behavior
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division undergraduate introduction to the biology of behavior, such as PSC 101, PSC 122, PSC 123, NPB 102, NPB 150, NPB 152, WFC 141, ENT 104, or ANS 105.
Survey of the phenomena and theory of animal behavior from the perspectives of multiple biological disciplines, including evolution, ecology, psychology, genetics, neurobiology, endocrinology, and animal science.
ANB 218B
Fundamentals of Animal Behavior
ANB 218A or PSC 218A;  or ECL 218A; consent of instructor.
Survey of the phenomena and theory of animal behavior from the perspectives of multiple biological disciplines, including evolution, ecology, psychology, genetics, neurobiology, endocrinology, and animal science.
ANB 221
Animal Behavior, Ecology & Evolution
NPB 102;  EVE 100;  EVE 101;  and Consent of Instructor.  Or the equivalent, graduate standing.
Interface between animal behavior, ecology and evolution. New developments in behavioral ecology development and testing of hypotheses in this discipline.
ANB 230A
Interdisciplinary Approaches to Animal Behavior
Consent of Instructor.
Analysis of literature in behavior and an allied discipline or disciplines that offer the potential, in combination, to advance the understanding of a topic in animal behavior conceptually and empirically. Topics vary from year to year.
ANB 230B
Interdisciplinary Approaches to Animal Behavior
ANB 230A;  Taken the previous quarter.
Development of an empirical or theoretical interdisciplinary approach to research on a current topic in animal behavior.
ANB 270
Research Conference in Behavioral Ecology
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.Limited enrollment. 
Critical presentation and evaluation of current literature and ongoing research in behavioral ecology.
ANB 287
Advanced Animal Behavior
NPB 102;  (EVE 100 or EVE 101);  and Consent of Instructor.  Or the equivalents; graduate standing.
Reading, reports and discussion on current topics in animal behavior, with a focus on topics that lie at the interface between animal behavior, ecology and evolution.
ANB 290
Seminar in Animal Behavior
Consent of Instructor.
Selected topics in animal behavior.
ANB 294
Seminar in Behavioral Ecology of Predators & Prey
Graduate standing.
Presentation and analysis of research papers on social and foraging behavior of predatory animals, antipredator strategies of prey species, co-evolution of predators and prey, and ecology of predator prey interactions.
ANB 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Lectures and/or discussion of current issues, problems, or techniques in animal behavior.
ANE 192
Internship in Anesthesiology
Upper division standing; approval of project prior to period of internship by preceptor.
Supervised work experience in anesthesia and related fields.
ANE 430
Intro to Anesthesiology & Perioperative Medicine
Consent of Instructor.
Introduction to anesthesiology during the MS3 year, with emphasis on introduction to the field of anesthesiology and the day-to-day practice of an anesthesiologist in the perioperative setting.
ANE 455
Externship in Anesthesiology
Consent of Instructor.
Away clinical rotation in Anesthesiology or Pain Medicine.
ANE 460
Anesthesiology Clinical Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.  Medical student.
In-depth exposure to anesthesia through informal lectures and mentoring by anesthesiologists. Emphasis on understanding and applying anesthetic principles in managing administration of general, regional, and specialized areas.
ANE 461
Perioperative Medicine
Successful completion of third-year clerkships; consent of IOR.
Two week rotation provides a broad exposure to various patient care services within the Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine to apply medical knowledge to safely care for patients.
ANE 462
Perioperative Management of the Obstetric Patient
Consent of Instructor.
Perioperative Management of Obstetric Patient advanced clinical clerkship will offer the medical student the chance to understand and be able to apply the principles of basic science into major improvements in obstetric anesthesia patient care.
ANE 463
Multidisciplinary Pain Management
Senior medical student in good standing.
Senior clerkship to expose students to all facets of treating pain in all aspects of clinical care: outpatient and inpatient settings, acute and chronic pain, end of life issues, pediatrics, rehabilitation, etc. Daily clinics, rounds, and lectures.
ANE 464
Multidisciplinary Approach to the Neurosurgical Patient
Consent of Instructor.
Participate in the perioperative care of patients undergoing neurosurgical procedures while under the supervision of anesthesia, neurology and neurosurgical ICU residents and attending physicians.
ANE 465
Away Acting Internship in Anesthesiology
Consent of Instructor.  Satisfactory completion of Anesthesiology Clerkship.
Work at the level of a sub intern in Inpatient and/or Outpatient settings. Expectation is to provide direct patient management.
ANE 480
Brief Introduction to Clinical Anesthesiology & Chronic Pain Management
Second-year medical student.
Daily experience in clinical anesthesiology at the preoperative screening unit, operating room, post anesthesia care unit, chronic pain management clinic with daily clinical correlation case discussions, and one-on-one interaction with faculty anesthesiologists.
ANE 493A
Applied Physiology & Pharmacology
Consent of Instructor.UC Davis School of Medicine students only.
Review and demonstrate the application of basic physiology and pharmacology to patient care. There will be an in-depth analysis of the physiology and pharmacology of the cardiovascular, pulmonary, nervous, renal and endocrine systems. 
ANE 493B
Interdisciplinary Medicine in Pain Care
Consent of Instructor.UC Davis School of Medicine students only.
Integrate applied and practical neuroanatomy, physiology, pharmacology, psychology/psychiatry and social medicine in the care of patients who are receiving care for pain caused by acute or chronic medical disease or trauma.  
ANE 498
Individual or Group Study
Interns and residents with consent of instructor.
Directed reading and discussion and/or laboratory investigation on selected topics.
ANE 499
Anesthesiology Research
Third- or fourth-year medical students, advanced standing undergraduate and veterinary medicine students; or consent of instructor.
Problems in clinical and/or laboratory research.
ANG 101
Animal Cytogenetics
BIS 101;  BIS 102;  Or equivalent of BIS 102.
Principles and techniques of cytogenetics applied to animal systems; chromosome harvest techniques, analysis of mitosis and meiosis, karyotyping, chromosome banding, cytogenetic mapping, chromosome structure and function, comparative cytogenetics.
ANG 105
Horse Genetics
ANS 015;  BIS 101.
Coat color, parentage testing, medical genetics, pedigrees, breeds, the gene map and genus Equus. Emphasis on understanding horse genetics based on the unity of mammalian genetics and making breeding decisions based on fundamental genetic concepts.
ANG 105
Horse Genetics
BIS 101;  ANS 015 recommended.
Coat color, parentage testing, medical genetics, pedigrees, breeds, the gene map and genus Equus. Emphasis on understanding horse genetics based on the unity of mammalian genetics and making breeding decisions based on fundamental genetic concepts.
ANG 107
Genetics and Animal Breeding
BIS 101.
Principles of quantitative genetics applied to improvement of livestock and poultry. Effects of mating systems and selection methods are emphasized with illustration from current breeding practices.
ANG 107
Genetics & Animal Breeding
BIS 101.Pass One restricted to Animal Science or Animal Science & Management majors in senior standing.
Principles of quantitative genetics applied to improvement of livestock and poultry. Effects of mating systems and selection methods are emphasized with illustration from current breeding practices.
ANG 111
Molecular Biology Laboratory Techniques
BIS 002C;  BIS 101;  (BIS 102 or ABI 102);  (BIS 103 or ABI 103).
Introduction to the concepts and techniques used in molecular biology; the role of this technology in both basic and applied animal research, and participation in laboratories using some of the most common techniques in molecular biology.
ANG 111
Molecular Biology Laboratory Techniques
BIS 002C;  BIS 101;  (BIS 102 or ABI 102);  (BIS 103 or ABI 103).Pass One restricted to Animal Science majors in Senior standing.
Introduction to the concepts and techniques used in molecular biology; the role of this technology in both basic and applied animal research, and participation in laboratories using some of the most common techniques in molecular biology.
ANG 185
Science of Captive Breeding & Reintroduction
BIS 002A;  BIS 002B;  BIS 002C.
Explore peer-reviewed literature surrounding the latest advances in captive breeding and reintroduction biology.
ANG 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Selected topics relating to animal genetics.
ANG 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

ANG 204
Theory of Quantitative Genetics
ANG 107;  Or the equivalent.
Theoretical basis of quantitative genetics and the consequences of Mendelian inheritance. Concepts used to estimate quantitative genetic differences and basis for partitioning the phenotypic variance.
ANG 206
Advanced Domestic Animal Breeding
ANG 107;  ANS 205; ANG 204 recommended.
Procedures for the genetic evaluation of individuals to include selection indices and mixed model evaluation for single and multiple traits. Methods of estimating genetic trends.
ANG 208
Estimation of Genetic Parameters
ANG 107;  ANS 205; ANG 204 and ANG 108 recommended.
General methods for the estimation of components of variance and covariance and their application to the estimation of heritability, repeatability and genetic correlations are considered. Specific emphasis is given to procedures applicable to livestock populations under selection.
ANG 212
Sequence Analysis in Molecular Genetics
BIS 101;  Or the equivalent; graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Use of computer algorithms and on-line databases to analyze nucleic acid and protein sequences in molecular genetics research.
ANG 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Lectures and discussions of advanced topics in animal genetics.
ANS 002
Introductory Animal Science
ANS 001 and BIS 002A recommended.Open to students in Animal Science, Animal Science and Management, Agricultural and Environmental Education, and Sustainable Agriculture and Food Systems majors. 
Growth, reproduction, lactation, inheritance, nutrition, and disease control in domesticated animals and species used in aquaculture; the application of sciences to animal production.
ANS 021
Livestock & Dairy Cattle Judging
ANS 001 or ANS 002 recommended.
Evaluation of type as presently applied to light horses, meat animals and dairy cattle. Relationship between form and function, form and carcass quality, and form and milk production.
ANS 022A
Animal Evaluation
ANS 021;  Or equivalent.
Attendance at 3 one-day weekend field trips required. Domestic livestock species with emphasis on visual appraisal, carcass evaluation, and application of performance information. Emphasis on accurate written and oral descriptions of evaluations. Prerequisite to intercollegiate judging competition.
ANS 022B
Animal Evaluation
ANS 022A;  Or equivalent.
Attendance at three one-day weekend field trips required. Continuation of ANS 022A with emphasis on specific species: swine, beef cattle and sheep. Application of animal science principles to selection and management problem-solving scenarios. Prerequisite to intercollegiate judging competition.
ANS 041L
Domestic Animal Production Laboratory
ANS 041 (can be concurrent).
Animal production principles and practices, including five field trips to dairy cattle, beef cattle, sheep, and swine operations and campus labs.
ANS 090C
Research Group Conference
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to lower division standing.
Weekly conference on research problems, progress and techniques in the animal sciences.
ANS 092
Internship in Animal Science
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to lower division standing.
Internship off and on campus in dairy, livestock, and aquaculture production, research and management; or in a business, industry, or agency associated with these or other animal enterprises. All requirements of Internship Approval form must be met.
ANS 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to lower division standing.

ANS 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to lower division standing.

ANS 100
Animal Physiology
BIS 002A;  CHE 002B.Pass One restricted to students in the Animal Science  and Animal Science and Management majors.
Basic principles of animal physiology in domesticated and captive animals with a comparative approach. Molecular, biochemical, chemical and physical aspects and their influences on function of physiological systems in animals.
ANS 103
Animal Welfare
ANS 104 or NPB 102 or WFC 141;  or Consent of Instructor.Restricted to upper division standing.
Application of principles of animal behavior and physiology to assessment and improvement of the welfare of wild, captive, and domestic animals. Topics include animal pain, stress, cognition, motivation, emotions, and preferences, as well as environmental enrichment methods.
ANS 104
Principles and Applications of Domestic Animal Behavior
ANS 002 or BIS 002B.
Basic principles of animal behavior as applied to domesticated species.   Emphasis placed on application of the principles of animal behavior.
ANS 104
Principles & Applications of Domestic Animal Behavior
ANS 002 or BIS 002B.Pass One open to Animal Science majors only.
Basic principles of animal behavior as applied to domesticated species. Emphasis placed on application of the principles of animal behavior.
ANS 106
Domestic Animal Behavior Laboratory
ANS 104 or NPB 102;  or Consent of Instructor.
Research experience with the behavior of large domestic animals. Experimental design, methods of data collection and analysis, and reporting of experimental results.
ANS 106
Domestic Animal Behavior Laboratory
ANS 104 or NPB 102;  or Consent of Instructor.
Research experience with the behavior of large domestic animals. Experimental design, methods of data collection & analysis, and reporting of experimental results.
ANS 107
Zoo Biology & Research
BIS 002B.
Introduction to the modern zoo, including history, staffing structure, aspects of animal care such as housing, social management, and enrichment, research in genetics, health, nutrition, behavior, cognition, and guest perceptions. Requires a visit to the Sacramento Zoo and development of a project research proposal based on a specific exhibit at the zoo.
ANS 112
Sustainable Animal Agriculture
BIS 002B or ANS 001;  STA 100 or PLS 120 recommended.
Current applications of sustainable animal agriculture including the challenges of animal production, animal needs, animal well-being, and protection of the environment and resources for future food supply systems. Various scenarios for meeting sustainability objectives are evaluated using computing modeling.
ANS 115
Advanced Horse Production
ANS 015;  BIS 101;  NUT 115;  (ANS 100 or NPB 101);  or Consent of Instructor.
Feeding, breeding, and management of horses; application of the basic principles of animal science to problems of production of all types of horses. Designed for students who wish to become professionally involved in the horse industry.
ANS 118
Fish Production
WFC 120.
Current practices in fish production; relationship between the biological aspects of a species and the production systems, husbandry, management, and marketing practices utilized. Emphasis on species currently reared in California.
ANS 119
Invertebrate Aquaculture
BIS 002B.
Management, breeding and feeding of aquatic invertebrates; application of basic principles of physiology, reproduction, and nutrition to production of mollusks and crustaceans for human food; emphasis on interaction of species biology and managerial techniques on production efficiencies.
ANS 120
Principles of Meat Science
ANS 002.Restricted to upper division standing.
Anatomical, physiological, developmental, and biochemical aspects of muscle underlying the conversion of muscle to meat. Includes meat processing, preservation, microbiology, and public health issues associated with meat products.
ANS 120L
Meat Science Laboratory
ANS 002;  ANS 120 (can be concurrent).Restricted to upper division standing.
Laboratory exercises and student participation in transformation of live animal to carcass and meat, structural and biochemical changes related to meat quality, chemical and sensory evaluation of meat, and field trips to packing plant and processing plant.
ANS 123
Animal Growth & Development
(ABI 103 or BIS 103);  (ANS 100 or NPB 101).
Growth and development of animals from conception to maturity, viewed from practical and biological perspectives; includes genetic, metabolic, nutritional control of cell and organism function.
ANS 124
Lactation
(NPB 101 or ANS 100);  (ABI 103 (can be concurrent) or BIS 103 (can be concurrent)).
Consideration of the biochemical, genetic, physiological, nutritional, and structural factors relating to mammary gland development, the initiation of lactation, the composition of milk and lactational performance.
ANS 125
Equine Exercise Physiology
(NPB 101 or ANS 100);  ANS 015.
Basic and applied physiology of the exercising horse. Includes physiological systems, gait analysis, lameness, pharmacology, sports medicine; sport horse performance evaluation and conditioning. 
ANS 126
Equine Nutrition
ANS 015;  NUT 115.
Equine digestion, digestive physiology, diet development and evaluation, and the relationship of the topics to recommended feeding practices and nutritional portfolios.
ANS 127
Advanced Equine Reproduction
ANS 115;  (ANS 100 or NPB 101).
Reproductive physiology, anatomy and endocrinology of the mare and stallion. Emphasis on structure/function relationships as they are applied to improving equine reproductive management and efficiency.
ANS 128
Agricultural Applications of Linear Programming
PLS 021 or ECS 015;  or Consent of Instructor.Restricted to upper division standing.
Applications of linear programming in agriculture, emphasizing resource allocation problems and decision making. Problems include crop production, ration formulation, and farm management. Hands-on experience in developing linear programs and interpreting the results.
ANS 129
Environmental Stewardship in Animal Production Systems
(BIS 010 or (BIS 002A,  BIS 002B)),  CHE 002A,  CHE 002B,  (CHE 008A,  CHE 008B) or (CHE 118A,  CHE 118B);  and Consent of Instructor.
Management principles of environmental stewardship for grazing lands, animal feeding, operations and aquaculture operations; existing regulations, sample analyses, interpretation and utilization of data, evaluation of alternative practices, and policy development.
ANS 130
Endocrinology Laboratory
ANS 100 or NPB 101.
Experimental approaches used in animal endocrinology research. Introductions to a variety of topics to help assimilate many ideas from physiology courses, experimental approaches, and skills reading and interpreting scientific papers.
ANS 131
Reproduction & Early Development in Aquatic Animals
MCB 150;  WFC 120;  or Consent of Instructor.
Physiological and developmental functions related to reproduction, breeding efficiency and fertility of animals commonly used in aquaculture.
ANS 133
Animal Cell Culture Laboratory
ABI 102;  ABI 103;  (ANS 100 or NPB 101);  or Consent of Instructor.
Design, conduct, analyze, and present a research project involving cell culture.
ANS 134
Animal Nutrition Laboratory
ABI 103 (can be concurrent);  (ANS 100 (can be concurrent) or NPB 101 (can be concurrent));  (STA 100 or PLS 120).
Animal nutrition research experience for senior-level students. Forming a valid hypothesis, designing treatments, preparing for experiments, recording measurements in the field, summarizing results. Emphasis on developing essential research skills & proper techniques for collecting, summarizing, and presenting data.
ANS 135
Production Animal Laboratory 
ABI 102;  ABI 103;  (NPB 101 or ANS 100).Pass One restricted to Animal Science and Animal Science and Management students.
Biochemical methods for developing and conducting research with production animals, and interpreting and presenting data. Laboratory focus course which uses sheep as model. There may be one or two mandatory all day Saturday field trips. 
ANS 135
Production Animal Laboratory 
ABI 102;  ABI 103;  (NPB 101 or ANS 100).Pass One restricted to Animal Science majors in senior standing.
Biochemical methods for developing and conducting research with production animals, and interpreting and presenting data. Laboratory focus course which uses sheep as model. There may be one or two mandatory all day Saturday field trips. 
ANS 136
Techniques and Practices of Fish Culture
ANS 002;  BIS 002A;  BIS 002B;  BIS 002C;  ((CHE 008A,  CHE 008B) or (CHE 118A,  CHE 118B)).Restricted to upper division standing. 
Daily care and maintenance of fish in residential aquariums, research and commercial facilities. Biological and environmental factors important to sound management of fish. Laboratories focus on fish culture including growth trials and biochemical assays.
ANS 136
Techniques & Practices of Fish Culture
ANS 002;  BIS 002A;  BIS 002B;  BIS 002C;  ((CHE 008A,  CHE 008B) or (CHE 118A,  CHE 118B)).Pass One restricted to Animal Science majors in Senior standing.
Daily care and maintenance of fish in residential aquariums, research and commercial facilities. Biological and environmental factors important to sound management of fish. Laboratories focus on fish culture including growth trials and biochemical assays.
ANS 137
Techniques and Practices of Avian Culture
ANS 002;  BIS 002A;  BIS 002B;  BIS 002C;  ((CHE 008A,  CHE 008B) or (CHE 118A,  CHE 118B)).Restricted to upper division standing. 
Daily care and maintenance of birds for research, commercial production and companion or hobby uses. Biological and environmental factors important to sound management of birds. Laboratories focus on bird husbandry, management and care and include growth trials and biochemical assays.
ANS 137
Techniques & Practices of Avian Culture
ANS 002;  BIS 002A;  BIS 002B;  BIS 002C;  ((CHE 008A,  CHE 008B) or (CHE 118A,  CHE 118B)).Pass One restricted to Animal Science majors in senior standing.
Daily care and maintenance of birds for research, commercial production and companion or hobby uses. Biological and environmental factors important to sound management of birds. Laboratories focus on bird husbandry, management and care and include growth trials and biochemical assays.
ANS 139
Experimental Animal Physiology
ABI 102;  BIS 101;  or Consent of Instructor.Restricted to seniors in the Animal Science and Animal Science and Management majors.
Combination of theory and hands-on experiences in animal physiology using various experimental techniques. Practical laboratory skill development from cellular level to whole animal, in areas such as genetics, endocrinology, histology and physiological function.
ANS 139
Experimental Animal Physiology
ABI 102;  BIS 101;  or Consent of Instructor.Pass One restricted to Animal Science majors in senior standing.
Combination of theory and hands-on experiences in animal physiology using various experimental techniques. Practical laboratory skill development from cellular level to whole animal, in areas such as genetics, endocrinology, histology and physiological function.
ANS 140
Management of Laboratory Animals
NPB 101 or ANS 100.
Laboratory animal management procedures in view of animal physiology, health and welfare, government regulations, and experimental needs. Clinical techniques using rodents and rabbits as models.
ANS 141
Equine Enterprise Management
ANS 115;  ECN 001A and ECN 001B recommended.
Examination of the concepts and principles involved in the operation of an equine enterprise. Essential aspects of equine enterprise management, including equine law, marketing, cash flow analysis, and impact of state and federal regulations.
ANS 142
Companion Animal Care and Management
ANS 042;  BIS 101;  (NPB 101 or ANS 100);  ABI 102 or BIS 102 and ABI 103 or BIS 103 recommended.
Management and production of companion animals. Integration of the disciplinary principles of behavior, genetics, nutrition, and physiology as related to the care of companion animals.
ANS 142
Companion Animal Care & Management
ANS 042;  BIS 101;  (NPB 101 or ANS 100);  ((ABI 102 or BIS 102) and (ABI 103 or BIS 103)) recommended.Pass One restricted to Animal Science or Animal Science & Management majors in senior standing.
Management and production of companion animals. Integration of the disciplinary principles of behavior, genetics, nutrition, and physiology as related to the care of companion animals.
ANS 143
Pig & Poultry Care & Management
NUT 115;  (NPB 101 or ANS 100);  ANS 041;  or Consent of Instructor.
Care and management of swine, broilers and turkeys as related to environmental physiology, nutrition and metabolism, disease management and reproduction. Saturday field trips. 
ANS 144
Beef Cattle & Sheep Production
ANS 041;  NUT 115;  or Consent of Instructor.  ANG 107 recommended.
Genetics, physiology, nutrition, economics and business in beef cattle and sheep production. Resources used, species differences, range and feedlot operations. Emphasis on integration and information needed in methods for management of livestock enterprises. One or two Saturday field trips. 
ANS 145
Meat Processing & Marketing
ANS 002;  Consent of Instructor.
Distribution, processing and marketing of meat and meat products. Meat and meat animal grading and pricing. Government regulations and social/consumer concerns. Future trends and impact on production management practices. Includes poultry.
ANS 146
Dairy Cattle Production
NUT 115;  or Consent of Instructor.  ANG 107 recommended.
Scientific principles from genetics, nutrition, physiology, and related fields applied to conversion of animal feed to human food through dairy animals. Management and economic decisions are related to animal biology considering the environment and animal well-being. Mandatory Saturday field-trip. 
ANS 147
Dairy Processing & Marketing
ANS 002;  or Consent of Instructor.Restricted to upper division standing.
Examination of distribution systems, processing practices, product quality, impact of government policy (domestic and foreign), marketing alternatives, and product development.
ANS 148
Enterprise Analysis in Animal Industries
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to students with upper division standing.
Examination and application of decision making and problem solving in the production enterprise. Areas of production analysis, problem solving, risk analysis and cost-benefit analysis will be examined in terms of the total enterprise.
ANS 149
Farrier Science
ANS 115.
In-depth examination of the structure-function relationship of the equine hoof and how it relates to conformation, injury and performance.
ANS 149L
Farrier Science Laboratory
ANS 149 (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.
Art and science of horseshoeing in equine related fields. Proper use of the tools, materials and techniques in the fabrication of shoes and safe preparation of the hoof for application of shoes.
ANS 150
Animal Health & Disease
ANS 002 or BIS 002B.
Basic concepts of animal immunology, microbiology, parasitology, epidemiology, vaccination, and how the knowledge can be used to improve animal health and prevent animal infection & disease. Includes relevant health and disease issues.
ANS 160A
Stress & Reproduction I
NPB 121 (can be concurrent);  ANS 104;  or Consent of Instructor.
Evaluation of the impact of chronic stress on male reproductive development. Isolation stress tests on young animals. Data collection of treatment and control groups. Biological laboratory techniques and analysis. Two-quarter course.
ANS 160A
Stress & Reproduction I
NPB 121 (can be concurrent);  (ANS 104 (can be concurrent) or NPB 102 (can be concurrent)).Pass One restricted to Animal Science majors in Senior standing.
Evaluation of the impact of chronic stress on male reproductive development. Isolation stress tests on young animals. Data collection of treatment and control groups. Biological laboratory techniques and analysis. Two-quarter course.
ANS 160B
Stress & Reproduction II
ANS 160A.
Evaluation of the impact of chronic stress on male reproductive development. Isolation stress tests on young animals. Data collection of treatment and control groups. Biological laboratory techniques and analysis. Two-quarter course.
ANS 170
Ethics of Animal Use
Any basic course in composition or speech, or completion of college English requirement.
Ethical issues relating to animal use in contemporary society. Integration of philosophical theories with scientific evidence relating to animal behavior, mentality, and welfare. Uses of animals in agriculture, research, and as companions. Ethical responsibilities regarding wildlife and the environment.
ANS 170
Ethics of Animal Use
Any basic course in composition or speech, or completion of college English requirement.Pass One open to Animal Science majors only.
Ethical issues relating to animal use in contemporary society. Integration of philosophical theories with scientific evidence relating to animal behavior, mentality, and welfare. Uses of animals in agriculture, research, and as companions. Ethical responsibilities regarding wildlife and the environment.
ANS 190C
Research Group Conference
Consent of Instructor.  Advanced standing.
Weekly conference on research problems, progress and techniques in the animal sciences.
ANS 192
Internship in Animal Science
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of 84 units.
Internship off and on campus in dairy, livestock and aquaculture production, research and management; or in a business, industry, or agency associated with these or other animal enterprises. All requirements of Internship Approval Form must be met.
ANS 194
Research in Animal Science
ANS 106 or ANS 135 or ANS 136 or ANS 137 or ANS 139 or ANG 111;  or ANS 133; and Consent of Instructor.
Research with a faculty mentor. Weekly discussion and laboratory on specific research topic. May include a seminar to research group. Choose from sections: (1) Animal Behavior; (2) Animal Genetics; (3) Animal Nutrition; (4) Animal Physiology. 
ANS 194HA
Undergraduate Honors Thesis in Animal Science
(NPB 101 or ANS 100);  (ABI 103 or BIS 103);  and Consent of Instructor.  Minimum cumulative GPA of 3.200 and selection by the Honors Selection Committee.
Carry out a research project (chosen from faculty-suggested or approved proposals) during the academic year under the guidance of a faculty member. Upon completion, write a thesis and present a public seminar describing his/her research.
ANS 194HB
Undergraduate Honors Thesis in Animal Science
(NPB 101 or ANS 100);  (ABI 103 or BIS 103);  and Consent of Instructor.  Minimum cumulative GPA of 3.200 and selection by the Honors Selection Committee.
Carry out a research project (chosen from faculty-suggested or approved proposals) during the academic year under the guidance of a faculty member. Upon completion, write a thesis and present a public seminar describing his/her research.
ANS 194HC
Undergraduate Honors Thesis in Animal Science
(NPB 101 or ANS 100);  (ABI 103 or BIS 103);  and Consent of Instructor.  Minimum cumulative GPA of 3.200 and selection by the Honors Selection Committee.
Carry out a research project (chosen from faculty-suggested or approved proposals) during the academic year under the guidance of a faculty member. Upon completion, write a thesis and present a public seminar describing his/her research.
ANS 197T
Tutoring in Animal Science
Consent of Instructor.  Animal Science or related major; upper division standing.
Tutoring of students in lower division Animal Science courses; weekly conference with instructors in charge of courses; written critiques of teaching procedures.
ANS 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Selected topics relating to the animal sciences. May be taught abroad.
ANS 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to students with upper division standing.

ANS 200
Strategies in Animal Production 
Consent of Instructor.
Examines the forces and issues in animal agriculture through the strategic management process.
ANS 206
Models in Agriculture & Nutrition
MAT 016B;  STA 108.
Basic model building principles and techniques for statistical and systems simulation models. Optimization techniques for non-linear experimental designs and management models are presented. Quantitative analysis and evaluation of linear and non-linear equations used in agriculture and nutrition.
ANS 259
Literature in Animal Science
Graduate standing.
Critical presentation and analysis of recent journal articles in animal science.  
ANS 290C
Research Group Conference
Graduate standing.
Weekly conference on research problems, progress and techniques in the animal sciences.
ANS 291
Current Research in Animal Science
Graduate standing.
Current research in animal science explored at weekly seminars presented by guest lecturers. Discussion of research presented.
ANS 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Lectures and discussions of advanced topics in the animal sciences.(Sect. 1, 2, 3-letter grading; from Sect. 4 on-S/U grading only.)
ANT 005
Proseminar in Biological Anthropology
Consent of Instructor.  ANT 001 or ANT 001Y recommended.
Primarily for majors. Integration of related disciplines in the study of biological anthropology through discussion and research projects. Principal emphasis in human adaptation to the environment.
ANT 036
Star Trek as Social Theory
ANT 002.
Introduction to core concepts in anthropological and social theory using Star Trek as a teaching vehicle. Emphasis on thinking anthropologically about everyday life and popular culture. 
ANT 036
Star Trek as Social Theory
ANT 002 recommended.
Introduction to core concepts in anthropological and social theory using Star Trek as a teaching vehicle. Emphasis on thinking anthropologically about everyday life and popular culture. 
ANT 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

ANT 100
Theory in Social-Cultural Anthropology
ANT 002 recommended.
Discussion of the theoretical and philosophical developments in cultural anthropology from the 19th century to the present.
ANT 101
Ecology, Nature, & Society
ANT 001 or ANT 002 or ESP 030 or EVE 100 or BIS 101 recommended.
Interdisciplinary study of diversity and change in human societies, using frameworks from anthropology, evolutionary ecology, history, archaeology, psychology, and other fields. Topics include population dynamics, subsistence transitions, family organization, disease, economics, warfare, politics, and resource conservation.
ANT 103
Indigenous Peoples & Natural Resource Conservation
ANT 002 or GEL 001 or ESP 030 recommended.
Integration of the interests of resident and indigenous peoples with the conservation of natural resources and ecosystems, using case study examples from both the developing and developed world.
ANT 104N
Cultural Politics of the Environment
ANT 002 recommended.
Political economy of environmental struggles. Relationship between social inequality (based on race, class and/or gender) and ecological degradation. Articulation of local peoples, national policy, and the international global economy in the contestation over the use of environmental resources.
ANT 107
Law, Power, Violence
ANT 002 recommended.
Cultural dimensions of law and political power.  Colonial and postcolonial legal regimes, bureaucratic reason, legalized violence, sovereign power, and human rights.
ANT 109
Visualization in Science: A Critical Introduction
ANT 002 or STS 001 or STS 020 recommended.
Anthropological approaches to scientific visualization techniques, informatics, simulations. Examination of different visualization techniques toward understanding the work involved in producing them, critical assessment of their power and limits, especially when visualizations are used socially to make claims.
ANT 120
Language & Culture
ANT 004 or LIN 001 recommended; ANT 002 recommended.
Culture, cognition, meaning, and interpretation; language and the classification of experience; communication and learning in crosscultural perspective.
ANT 121
Special Topics in Medical Anthropology
ANT 002 recommended.
Introduction to critical medical anthropology. Topics include anthropological analysis of bio-medicine, psychiatry, systems of knowledge and healing, the body, emotions, and clinical encounters in a cross-cultural perspective. 
ANT 122B
Anthropology & Political Economy
ANT 002 recommended.
Survey of anthropological approaches to the study of political organizations; inter-relationships among political institutions, economic infrastructures and cultural complexity.
ANT 123AN
Resistance, Rebellion, & Popular Movements
ANT 002 recommended.
Analysis of popular protest in Third World and indigenous societies ranging from covert resistance to national revolts. Comparative case studies and theories of peasant rebellions, millenarian movements, social bandits, Indian "wars", ethnic and regional conflicts, gender and class conflicts.
ANT 124
Religion in Society & Culture
ANT 002 recommended.
Discussion of anthropological theories of religion with emphasis on non-literate societies. Survey of shamanism, magic and witchcraft, ritual and symbols, and religious movements. Extensive discussion of ethnographic examples and analysis of social functions of religious institutions.
ANT 125A
Structuralism & Symbolism
ANT 002 recommended.
Survey of anthropological approaches to understanding the logic of structuralism and symbolism in cultural analysis. Focus on how structural and symbolic interpretations relate to cultural and linguistic universals and to the philosophical basis of relativism in the social sciences. (Former ANT 125.)
ANT 125B
Postmodernism(s) & Culture
ANT 002 recommended.
U.S.-European postmodern condition. "Modernity" as an incomplete project for subordinated groups. Economic, social, technological and political conditions leading to postmodern aesthetics, in comparison with postcolonialism, feminism and minority discourse.
ANT 125B
Postmodernism(s) & Culture
ANT 002 recommended.
Crucial theories of modernity and post-modernity. How postmodernism is distinct from modernism, why it is related to the collapse of certainty about our collective reality and what it reveals about the status of reason, the self, and collective experience. Readings draw from various philosophical-theoretical, artistic and political literatures. 
ANT 126A
Anthropology of Development
ANT 002 recommended.
Theories of development and current critiques. Colonial legacies and post-colonial realities. Roles of the state and NGOs, population migrations, changing gender identities, cash-earning strategies, and sustainability issues. Stresses importance of cultural understandings in development initiatives. Case studies emphasizing non-industrial societies.
ANT 126B
Women & Development
ANT 002 recommended.
Current Third World and Western development issues concerning women in agriculture, industry, international division of labor, political movements, revolutions, politics of health, education, family and reproduction. Impact of colonialism, capitalism, the world system, and international feminism on women and development.
ANT 127
Urban Anthropology
ANT 002;  or Consent of Instructor.
Survey of approaches to urban living: political structures, organizationcase studies.
ANT 128A
Kinship & Social Organization
ANT 001 and ANT 002 recommended.
Comparative examination of personal kinship, descent, marriage, household and family organizations; the theories that account for variation, and recent advances in the treatment of these data.
ANT 128B
Self, Identity, & Family
ANT 002 recommended.
Exploration of self, identity, and family systems cross-culturally. Impact of class, gender, race, ethnicity, ruralization, urbanization, and globalization on notions of selfhood in different social/cultural systems.
ANT 129
Health & Medicine in a Global Context
ANT 002 recommended.
Recent works in medical anthropology and the science studies of medicine dealing with social and cultural aspects of global health issues such as AIDS, pandemics, clinical trials, cultural differences in illnesses, diabetes, organ trafficking, medical technologies, illness narratives, and others.
ANT 130A
Cultural Dimensions of Globalization
ANT 002 recommended.
Cultural dimensions of recent economic and political developments frequently termed "globalization."
ANT 130BN
Migration & the Politics of Place & Identity
ANT 002 recommended.
Internal and international migration from an anthropological perspective, including causes, processes, and political, economic, and cultural effects of spatial mobility and displacement.  Emphasizes the interplay of identity, place, and power in diverse cultural and historical contexts.
ANT 131
Ecology & Politics
ANT 002 recommended.
Analysis of the complex interactions between ecological dynamics and political processes employing the emerging approach of political ecology. Case studies of environmental degradation (e.g., desertification, logging, mineral extraction, petroleum, water) from various cultural and geographic regions.
ANT 132
Psychological Anthropology
ANT 002 recommended.
History of the relationship between anthropology and psychoanalysis. Exploration of anthropology of emotions, colonial psychology, contemporary ethno-psychiatry, studies on personhood, possession, magic, altered states, subjectivity, and definitions of the normal and the pathological in different contexts and cultures.  
ANT 133
Anthropology of Ocean Worlds
ANT 002 recommended.
Exploration of various oceanic cultures and their engagement with the sea. Piracy, smuggling, exchange, maritime legal regimes, offshore policing, media infrastructures, and ocean ecologies. 
ANT 134
Buddhism in Global Culture
ANT 002 recommended.Limited to 50 students.
Buddhist meditation and ritual as a cultural system that adapts to global and local forces of change. Anthropological theory and method in understanding global culture transmission, including Buddhist reform movements in Asia and Buddhist practice in the West.
ANT 135
Media Anthropology
Upper division standing.
Examining human practices through their inscription in old and new media; evaluating the emergent fields of cyber and digital anthropology; and problematizing terms and concepts routinely deployed in studies of media worldsplatform, social media, hologram, algorithm, remediation, curation, animation.
ANT 136
Ethnographic Film
ANT 002 recommended.
Overview of the use of film in anthropology and its advantages and limitations in comparison to written ethnographic descriptions. Essential features of ethnographic films. Film production in anthropological research and problems encountered in producing films in the field.
ANT 137
Meditation & Culture
ANT 002 recommended.Limited to 50 students.
Study and practice of the relation between meditation and cultural conditioning; comparison of Buddhist practice with other cultural constructions of mind, body, brain, thought, emotion, and self.
ANT 138
Ethnographic Research Methods in Anthropology
ANT 002 recommended.
Basic concepts in and approaches to ethnographic field research. Problem formulation, research design, qualitative and quantitative data collection procedures, and techniques for organizing, retrieving, and analyzing information. Ethnographic description and constructed inference. Students will organize and conduct individual research projects.
ANT 139AN
Race, Class, Gender Systems
ANT 002 recommended.
Comparative analysis of class/race/gender inequality, concentrating on the ways in which beliefs about descent, "blood," and biological difference interact with property and marital systems to affect the distribution of power in society.
ANT 139BN
Gender & Sexuality
ANT 002 recommended.
Gender and sexuality in foraging bands, horticultural and pastoral tribes, agricultural and industrial states. Debates on cultural evolution and distribution of gender hierarchies. Impact of politics, economics, religion, social practices, women's movements on gender and sexuality. Culture, nature and sexuality.
ANT 140A
Cultures & Societies of West & Central Africa
ANT 002 recommended.
Ethnographic survey of West Africa and Congo Basin with analyses of representative societies which illustrate problems of general theoretical concern. Major consideration will be the continuities and discontinuities between periods prior to European contact and the present.
ANT 140B
Cultures & Societies of East & South Africa
ANT 002 recommended.
Ethnographic survey of Eastern and Southern Africa with analyses of selected societies which illustrate problems of interest to anthropologists. Major consideration will be given to continuities and discontinuities between periods prior to European contact and the present.
ANT 141C
People of the Arctic: Contemporary & Historic Cultures of the Circumpolar Region
ANT 002 or ANT 003 recommended.
Social, economic, political, and religious lives of Russian, American, Canadian, and Greenlandic Arctic people (Yup'ik, Iupiat, Inuit). Topics include Arctic ecosystems, archaeological record of human occupation, ethnohistorical and ethnographic accounts, arctic people in popular culture, and contemporary issues.
ANT 142
Peoples of the Middle East
ANT 002 recommended.
Peoples of the Middle East (including North Africa). Discussions of class relations, kinship organization, sex/gender systems, religious beliefs and behavior, ethnic relations, political systems. Impact of world systems, political and religious movements and social change. (Former ANT 136.)
ANT 143A
Ethnology of Southeast Asia
ANT 002 recommended.
Patterns of culture and social organization from prehistory to the present, in the context of historical, ecological, economic, and political settings. Emphasis on the relation of ethnic minorities to national states.
ANT 144
Contemporary Societies & Cultures of Latin America
ANT 002 recommended.
Introduction to contemporary social structure of Latin America. Origins, maintenance and changes in inequality: economic responses to poverty, sociocultural responses to discrimination, and political responses to powerlessness.
ANT 145
Performance, Embodiment, & Space in South Asia
ANT 002;  or Consent of Instructor.
South Asian cultures and societies with a focus on performance, embodiment, and space from several disciplinary fields. Topics may include colonialism, nationalism, religious traditions, media, popular culture, cities, social movements, modernity, body-cultures, identity, gender, and diasporas.
ANT 146N
Topics in the Anthropology of Europe
ANT 002 recommended.
Recent ethnographies of different nation-states and socio-political spaces in Europe. Topics include the question of old and new boundaries, historical and contemporary constructions of Europe, migration and ethnicity, citizenship, belonging, multiculturalism, and post/socialisms.   
ANT 147
Modern South Asia Cinema
Upper division standing or consent of instructor.
South Asian cinema of last 100 years in the context of cultural, social, and political changes. South Asian history, Independence, Partition, urban life, class, migration, postcolonial identity, diaspora, gender, sexuality, religion, sport, performance, etc.
ANT 148A
Culture & Political Economy in Contemporary China
ANT 002 recommended.
Examining contemporary Chinese culture and political economy through reading ethnographic studies on recent transformations in rural and urban Chinese society. Special attention is given to state power, popular culture, spatial mobility, city space, and gender.
ANT 151
Primate Evolution
ANT 001 or BIS 002B or BIS 002C or EVE 010 recommended.
Origin and relationships of the prosimians, monkeys, and apes.
ANT 152
Human Evolution
ANT 001 recommended.
Nature and results of the evolutionary processes involved in the formation and differentiation of humankind.
ANT 153
Human Genetics: Mutation & Migration
(ANT 001,  BIS 002B) or (ANT 001,  MCB 010) or (BIS 002B,  MCB 010).
Introduction to human genetics. Principles of inheritance, the human genome, population genetics, mutation, genetic diversity, using DNA to study ancient human history, personal genomics. Human genetics as a tool to understand the patterns and processes of human migration. Introduction to the major concepts in human genetic and genomic research.
ANT 153
Human Genetics: Mutation & Migration
BIS 002B C- or better or MCB 010 C- or better.
Introduction to human genetics. Principles of inheritance, the human genome, population genetics, mutation, genetic diversity, using DNA to study ancient human history, personal genomics. Human genetics as a tool to understand the patterns and processes of human migration. Introduction to the major concepts in human genetic and genomic research.
ANT 154A
The Evolution of Primate Behavior
ANT 001 or ANT 054 or EVE 010 recommended.
Examines ecological diversity and evolution of social systems of prosimians, monkeys, and apes, placing the social behavior of the primates in the context of appropriate ecological and evolutionary theory.
ANT 154B
Primate Evolutionary Ecology
ANT 001 or EVE 010 recommended.
Examination of the ecology of primates within an evolutionary framework. Theoretical concepts in individual, population, and community ecology, illustrated with primate (and other vertebrate) examples, with additional discussion of primate and rainforest conservation.
ANT 154C
Primate Behavior: Methods & Experimental Design
(ANT 054 or ANT 154A or ANT 154B or NPB 102);  (STA 013 or STA 013Y or STA 032 or STA 100 or SOC 046B);  ANT 154CL (can be concurrent).Pass One restricted to upper division ANT majors; concurrent enrollment in ANT 154CL required.
Scientific methods of studying, describing and analyzing the behavior and ecology of primates.
ANT 154CL
Laboratory in Primate Behavior
(ANT 054 or ANT 154A or ANT 154B or NPB 102);  (STA 013 or STA 013Y or STA 032 or STA 100 or SOC 046B);  ANT 154C (can be concurrent);  Concurrent enrollment with ANT 154C required.Pass One restricted to upper division Anthropology majors only.

ANT 155
Primate Conservation Biology
ANT 001 or ANT 054 recommended.
Study of the taxonomic, ecological and cultural diversity of Primates and how human activities impact tropical ecosystems. Emphasis on case studies and applied research methods. Includes discussion about career opportunities in conservation.
ANT 156A
Human Osteology
ANT 001 or ANT 001Y recommended.Not open to students who have previously completed ANT 156.
Human skeleton from archaeological, forensic, and paleontological perspectives, including anatomical nomenclature, variation with sex and age, function, evolution, growth, and development of bones and teeth. Hands-on study and identification of human skeletal remains.
ANT 156B
Advanced Human Osteology
ANT 156A;  Or equivalent.
Human skeletons from archaeological, forensic, and paleontological contexts. Bone and tooth structure, growth, and development; measurement, statistics, and biomechanics; assessment of age, sex, weight, height, and ancestry; and indicators of illness, injuries, diet, and activities.
ANT 157
Anthropological Genetics
ANT 001 or BIS 002C recommended.
Method and theory of genetic and genomic analysis of molecular evolution of human and non-human primate populations. Special attention to the molecular evolutionary transition to humans and genetic differences among extant human populations and their adaptive significance.
ANT 157
Advanced Human Genetics
ANT 153 or BIS 101 or EVE 102 or EVE 131 or EVE 175 or MCB 162 or MCB 182.
Advanced concepts in human genetics and genomics. Identification of genes underlying human health and disease. Use of genomic data in clinical settings and examination of biases associated with 'personalized medicine." Emphasis on current human genomic technology and critical reading of scientific papers.
ANT 157L
Laboratory in Anthropological Genetics
ANT 157 (can be concurrent);  ANT 001 or BIS 002C recommended; enrolled in ANT 157 concurrently or following.
Methods for identifying genetic variation in human blood group antigens, serum proteins and red cell enzymes (hemaglutination), general electrophoresis on starch, cellulose acetate and polyacrylamide, immunodiffusion and immunoelectrophoresis on agarase.
ANT 157L
Advanced Human Genetics Lab
ANT 153 or EVE 102 or EVE 131 or EVE 175 or MCB 162 or MCB 182;  Concurrent enrollment in ANT 157 encouraged.
Computer lab in human genetics and genomics. Emphasizes hands-on engagement with human genetic/genomic data. Ancestry analysis, pedigrees, de novo Mendelian disease.
ANT 158
Evolution of Females & Males: Biological Perspective
ANT 001 recommended.
Current theoretical frameworks for explaining the evolution of sex differences and for understanding the interrelationship between biological processes and cultural construction of gender roles.
ANT 160
Neandertals & Modern Human Origins
ANT 001 or ANT 001Y or equivalent recommended.
Origins, evolution, and disappearance of Neandertals. Emergence of humans like us in both anatomy and behavior. Interpretation of the fossil and archaeological records of Europe and Africa. Genetics of living and fossil humans.
ANT 170
Archeological Theory & Method
ANT 003 recommended.
Introduction to history and development of archeological theory and method, with particular emphasis on the basic dependence of the latter on the former. Stress is on historical development of archaeology in the New World.
ANT 172
New World Prehistory: The First Arrivals
ANT 003 recommended.
Survey of data relating to the peopling of the New World. Cultural adaptation and development of early inhabitants of North and South America.
ANT 174
European Prehistory
ANT 003 recommended.
Survey of the prehistory of Europe from its earliest human inhabitants, to the Neandertals and first modern humans, and through early agricultural and complex societies. Analysis and interpretation of the European archaeological record for understanding human dispersals into Europe.
ANT 175
Andean Prehistory: Archaeology of the Incas & Their Ancestors
ANT 003 recommended.
Prehistory of the Andean region, especially Peru, from the earliest hunting and gathering societies through the Inca. Focus on the use of archaeological data to reconstruct ancient human adaptations to the varied Andean environments.
ANT 176
Prehistory of California and the Great Basin
Consent of Instructor.  ANT 003 recommended.
Description and analysis of the prehistoric peoples of California and the Great Basin from earliest times to European contact.
ANT 176
Prehistory of California & the Great Basin
ANT 003 recommended.
Description and analysis of the prehistoric peoples of California and the Great Basin from earliest times to European contact.
ANT 177
African Prehistory
ANT 003 recommended.
Survey of prehistory of Africa from early human ancestors, through modern human origins, and into early agricultural and complex societies and the Bantu expansion.  Analysis and interpretation of the African archaeological record, incorporating human paleontology and genetics.
ANT 178
Hunter-Gatherers
ANT 003 recommended.
Study and interpretation of the ancient and modern lifeway in which peoples support themselves with primitive technologies and without benefit of domesticated plants and animals.
ANT 179
Asian Prehistory
ANT 003 recommended.
Survey of the prehistory of Asia from the earliest human occupations to the rise of complex societies. Special focus on fossil and archeological records. 
ANT 180
Zooarchaeology
ANT 001 or ANT 003 recommended.Restricted to junior or senior standing.
Theories and methods for studying animal skeletal remains from archaeological sites. Identification and quantification of zooarchaeological material, cultural and natural processes affecting animal bones pre- and postburial, and use of faunal remains for determining past human diets and past environments.
ANT 181
 Archaeological Field Methods
ANT 003.
Survey of archeological field methods and techniques. Strategies for survey and site location, mapping of artifacts and features, geophysical techniques, and hand excavation and analysis of stratigraphy.
ANT 181L
Field Course in Archeological Methods
ANT 181;  or Consent of Instructor.
On-site course using archaeological methods and techniques held at a field location in the western United States, generally California or Nevada. Incorporates basic methods of archaeological survey, mapping, and excavation.
ANT 182
Archaeometry
ANT 003 recommended.
Scientific techniques used to study the chemical and physical properties of archaeological materials. Types of anthropological questions that can be addressed with different methods. Preparation and analysis of archaeological materials.
ANT 183
Laboratory in Archeological Analysis
Consent of Instructor.  ANT 003 recommended.Limited enrollment.
Museum preparation, advanced field investigation, and guidance in preparation of museum material for publication. 
ANT 184
Prehistoric Technology: The Material Aspects of Prehistoric Adaptation
ANT 003 recommended.
Examination of the role of lithic, ceramic, textile and wooden implements as elements in prehistoric survival and development. Emphasis is descriptive, but the significance of material resources as factors in prehistoric adaptation, settlement patterns, and culture change are discussed.
ANT 185
Lithic Analysis
ANT 003 recommended.
Basic concepts of lithic analysis. General introduction on the place of stone tool technology in the archeological record. Physics, terminology and methodological concepts behind the study of stone tools. Review of the development of stone tool technology from its emergence.
ANT 187
Cultural Resource Management in Archaeology
ANT 003;  or Consent of Instructor.  ANT 170 recommended.
Examination of legal foundations and goals of cultural resource management in the United States, with a focus on archaeological resources. Review of state and federal regulations, guidelines for assessing eligibility for listing in the National Register of Historic Places, professional practices to preserve and mitigate damage to resources, and public outreach practices.
ANT 191
Topics in Anthropology
Upper division standing.
Intensive treatment of a special anthropological topic or problem.
ANT 192
Internship in Anthropology
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.Limited to Anthropology majors.
Work experience off and on campus in all subject areas offered in the Department of Anthropology under the supervision of a member of the faculty.
ANT 194H
Special Study for Honors Students
Consent of Instructor.  Open only to majors of senior standing who qualify for honors program.
Independent study of an anthropological problem involving the writing of an honors thesis.
ANT 197T
Tutoring in Anthropology
Upper division standing with major in Anthropology and consent of Department Chairperson.
Leading of small voluntary discussion groups affiliated with one of the department's regular courses. 
ANT 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed reading and group discussion of selected anthropological problems.
ANT 201
Critical Readings in Ethnography
Graduate student in Anthropology or consent of instructor.
Critical readings of selected ethnographies that examine a wide range of important topics and analytical issues in social and cultural anthropology. Emphasis on how and why ethnographic writing has changed over time and its relationship with contemporary theoretical explorations.
ANT 204
Contemporary Issues in Anthropological Theory
ANT 002;  ANT 137;  or Consent of Instructor.
Advanced consideration of fundamental issues in anthropological theory.Emphasis on critical examination of major contemporary debates between proponents of competing theories.
ANT 206
Research Design & Method in Social Anthropology
Consent of Instructor.
Formulation of research problems and preparation of research proposals; relationships between theory and method, funding, pre-fieldwork preparations, entering the community, field research techniques, and problems of ethics; intensive work on proposal writing.
ANT 207
Ethnographic Writing
ANT 137;  ANT 201;  Or the equivalent.
Relationship between conducting participant observation of others andwriting it up,emphasizing the processual rift between the reality of fieldwork and its written representation. Study of various literary genres and textual strategies used in cultural anthropology.
ANT 212
Political Ecology
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Interdisciplinary seminar evaluating contributions from ecological anthropology, political economy, cultural constructivism, postmodernism, and feminism towards development of theories of political ecology. Historical relationships between local/global power structures, environmental degradation, and resistance movements. Case studies of desertification, deforestation, mining, conservation, development.
ANT 220
Field Course in Linguistics
ANT 110;  ANT 111.
Techniques of eliciting, recording, and analyzing; work with a nativespeaker.
ANT 221
Rural Transformation in Postcolonial Societies
ANT 223;  ANT 265;  or Consent of Instructor.
Problems of rural transformation arising out of political and economic interaction between national elites and rural regional and local populations under varying conditions of induced change in postcolonial societies. Attention given to the implications of this interaction for rapid economic growth.
ANT 222
Cities & Citizenship
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Explores the nature of modern cities, urban socioeconomic life, and urban culture and politics from an anthropological perspective.
ANT 223
Economic Anthropology
ANT 122;  or Consent of Instructor.
Selected current methodological and theoretical problems in the analysisof nonindustrial economic systems.
ANT 226
Consciousness & Resistance
Completion of first-year graduate work or consent of instructor.
Consideration of approaches to the study of social inequality, and responses of subordinated groups. Emphasis on situating approaches to contemporary social theory, concrete research problems, and political strategies. Topics: formation of consciousness and identity; collective action, accommodation to frontal resistance.
ANT 228
Culture & Power
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Exploration of one of the core paradigms within contemporary anthropological inquiry, "culture and power." Focus on how distinct theoretical perspectives--Marxism, post-Marxism, structuralism, post-structuralism, and feminism--have examined the mutually constitutive nature of culture and power.
ANT 230
Family Systems & Reproduction: Theory & Comparisons
Graduate standing in one of the social sciences including History.
Comparative examination of family systems in historical context and of reproductive behaviors and strategizing. A major theme is how family-system norms specify the relative desirability of differently configured offspring sets. Cases are drawn from Western Europe and South and East Asia.
ANT 232
Political Movements
Completion of first-year graduate work recommended.
Interdisciplinary approach to political movements of protest, reform, and revolution emphasizing historical comparison and evaluation of major theoretical approaches including world systems, resource mobilization, state & culture, rational choice, moral economy, social class and gender.
ANT 245
Ethnology of Northern & Central Asia
Reading knowledge of German, Russian, Chinese, or Japanese.
Lectures on the culture aboriginally found north of the Caucasus-Korea line. Supervised study of the primary and secondary sources. Work with informants when available.
ANT 246
Ethnology of Europe
Reading knowledge of a European language other than English.
Supervised study of the primary and secondary sources dealing with the ethnography and ethnology of the peoples of Europe. Emphasis upon folk, peasant, and minority groups.
ANT 248
Topics in Chinese Culture & Society
Graduate standing in the social sciences, history, or the humanities.
Selected topics in the anthropology of Chinese society. Focus on one or more of the following topics: state-society dynamics, family and gender, city formation and urban life, social movement, labor politics, and religion and ideology in Chinese society. 
ANT 250
Behavioral Ecology of Primates
ANT 154A (can be concurrent);  Or the equivalent, graduate standing.
Concepts, issues, and hypotheses in primate behavioral ecology, with emphasis on the social and ecological determinants and consequences of variation in social organization for individuals.  
ANT 252
Human Evolution Seminar
ANT 152;  and Consent of Instructor.  Or the equivalent of ANT 152.
Study of selected topics in human evolutionary studies. Each year, focuses on one or more of the following: molecular evolution, primate evolutionary biology, Tertiary hominoids, Australopithecus, Homo erectus, archaic Homo sapiens, brain evolution.
ANT 253
Seminar in Human Biology
ANT 153;  ANT 157;  or Consent of Instructor.
Study of selected topics in human biology.
ANT 254
Current Issues in Primate Sociobiology
ANT 154B;  Or the equivalent.
Analysis of primate behavior, with particular emphasis on preparation for field studies.
ANT 256
Primate Conservation Biology
ANT 154; Graduate standing, or upper division undergraduates with consent of instructor.Limited to 10 students.
Application of understanding of primate biology to conservation of primates and their habitat. Topics include evolutionary anthropology, behavioral ecology, biogeography, macroecology, population biology, and socio-ecology of primates.
ANT 261
Modeling the evolution of social behavior
MAT 016C;  or Consent of Instructor.  Or equivalent of MAT 016C.
Tools and topics in modeling the evolution of social behavior in humans and other animals. Game theory, basic population genetics, animal conflict, altruism, reciprocity, signaling, and group selection. 
ANT 262
Evolution & Human Behavior
Graduate standing, or consent of instructor.
Exploration of the links between behavioral ecological theory and human cultural variation, focusing on reproduction, marriage, parental investment and family structure; implications of evolutionary theory for social organization in human communities, historical and contemporary.
ANT 280
Current Anthropology Journal Editorial Workshop
Consent of Instructor.Students must enroll for all three quarters.
Reading and offering workshop critiques of manuscripts submitted for publication, and reading and discussion of other relevant work in anthropology and human ecology. Track and edit published comments and authors replies that accompany major features. Participation in the development of new sections for the electronic edition of the journal, including a "news and views" section and a debate section. 
ANT 291
Advanced Topics in Human Behavioral Ecology
ANT 261 or ANT 262 or ANT 263;  and Consent of Instructor.  Or comparable experience in anthropology or related disciplines.
Topically focused, critical discussion of current and emerging research in the field of human behavioral ecology, giving special attention to theory, concepts, models, and methods for the evolutionary analysis of ethnographic and archaeological evidence.
ANT 390
Teaching Anthropology
Graduate standing in Anthropology or closely related discipline.
Intellectual and practical elements of college teaching in the field of Anthropology, from curriculum design and the syllabus through grading and course evaluations, including  classroom and information technology methods, and problems and rewards of teaching in higher education.
ANT 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Graduate standing.

APC 092
Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.
Internship experience off and on campus in all subject areas offered in the Department of Anatomy, Physiology & Cell Biology. Internships are supervised by a member of the faculty.
APC 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

APC 100
Comparative Vertebrate Organology
(BIS 001A,  BIS 001B) or (BIS 002A,  BIS 002B).
Functional anatomy of major organ systems in vertebrates. Each system examined from cellular to gross level in fish, birds, and mammals. Emphasis on how differentiated cell types are integrated into tissues and organs to perform diverse physiological functions.
APC 192
Internship
Upper division standing; approval of internship.
Internship experience off and on campus in all subject areas offered in the Department of Anatomy, Physiology & Cell Biology. Internships are supervised by a member of the faculty.
APC 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

APC 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

APC 286
Basics of Microscopy & Cellular Imaging
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.Limited to 20 students.
Practical applications of basic microscope techniques used to image cells and tissues with the goal of using these techniques to generate publication quality images. Principles of light, epifluorescent, confocal and electron microscopy, their applications and limitations.
APC 291
Topics in Biology of Respiratory System
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Topics concerning structure and function of respiratory system. Possible topics include: lung growth, pulmonary reaction to toxicants, pulmonary inflammation, lung metabolism, biology of lung cells, tracheobronchial epithelium, nasal cavity structure and function.
APC 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

APC 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.

ARB 002
Elementary Arabic 2
ARB 001;  or Consent of Instructor.
Continuation of basic Arabic from ARB 001. Interactive and integrated presentation of listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills, including syntax. Focus on standard Arabic and limited use of spoken Egyptian and/or one other colloquial dialect. 
ARB 003
Elementary Arabic 3
ARB 002;  or Consent of Instructor.
Continuation of introduction to basic Arabic from ARB 001 and ARB 002. Interactive and integrated presentation of listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills, including syntax. Focus on standard Arabic with limited use of spoken Egyptian and/or one other colloquial dialect.
ARB 021
Intermediate Arabic 21
ARB 003;  or Consent of Instructor.
Builds on courses ARB 001, ARB 002, and ARB 003. Interactive and integrated presentation of listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills, including idiomatic expression. Focus on standard Arabic with limited use of Egyptian and/or one other colloquial dialect. 
ARB 021C
Colloquial Egyptian Arabic
ARB 003;  or Consent of Instructor.
Continuation of the Colloquial Egyptian Arabic covered in the first year of Arabic; ARB 001, ARB 002, and ARB 003.
ARB 021L
Colloquial Levantine Arabic
ARB 003;  or Consent of Instructor.
Continuation of colloquial Levantine Arabic presented in ARB 001, ARB 002 and ARB 003. Integrated presentation of speaking and listening skills in colloquial Levantine Arabic, with reading and writing in Modern Standard Arabic that is related to Levantine cultural production and social life.
ARB 022
Intermediate Arabic 22
ARB 021;  or Consent of Instructor.
Continuation of ARB 021. Interactive and integrated presentation of listening, speaking, reading, and writing, including idiomatic expression. Focus on standard Arabic with limited use of Egyptian and/or one other colloquial dialect. 
ARB 022C
Colloquial Egyptian Arabic
ARB 021C;  or Consent of Instructor.
Continuation of the Colloquial Egyptian Arabic covered in first year of Arabic; courses ARB 001, ARB 002, and ARB 003 and the first quarter of Colloquial Arabic ARB 021C.
ARB 022L
Colloquial Levantine Arabic
ARB 021L;  or Consent of Instructor.
Continuation of colloquial Levantine Arabic presented in ARB 021L. Integrated presentation of speaking and listening skills in colloquial Levantine Arabic; reading and writing in Modern Standard Arabic related to Levantine social life.
ARB 023
Intermediate Arabic 23
ARB 022;  or Consent of Instructor.
Continuation of ARB 021 and ARB 022. Interactive and integrated presentation of Arabic listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills, including idiomatic expression.
ARB 023C
Colloquial Egyptian Arabic
ARB 022C;  or Consent of Instructor.
Continuation of Colloquial Egyptian Arabic covered in ARB 022C.
ARB 023L
Colloquial Levantine Arabic
ARB 022L;  or Consent of Instructor.
Continuation of colloquial Levantine Arabic presented in ARB 022L. Integrated presentation of speaking and listening skills in colloquial Levantine Arabic; reading and writing in Modern Standard Arabic related to Levantine social life.
ARB 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study. 
ARB 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.
Special study. 
ARB 101A
Readings in Arabic: 600-1850
ARB 123;  or Consent of Instructor.
Readings in Arabic. Poetry, prose literature, and selections from texts on religion, history, politics, science, philosophy and mysticism. 
ARB 121
Advanced Arabic
ARB 023;  or Consent of Instructor.
Review, refinement, and development of skills learned in intermediate Arabic through work with texts, video, and audio on cultural and social issues. Integrated approach to reading, writing, listening, speaking primarily standard Arabic, with limited use of one colloquial dialect.
ARB 122
Advanced Arabic
ARB 121;  or Consent of Instructor.
Continuation of ARB 121. Further development of advanced skills in reading, listening, writing, and speaking standard Arabic through work with texts, video, and audio on cultural and social issues. Limited use of one colloquial dialect. 
ARB 123
Advanced Arabic
ARB 122;  or Consent of Instructor.
Continuation of ARB 122. Further development of advanced skills in reading, listening, writing, and speaking standard Arabic through work with texts, video, and audio on cultural and social issues. Limited use of one colloquial dialect. 
ARB 141
Readings in Modern Arabic Literature
ARB 123;  or Consent of Instructor.
Readings of modern Arabic poetry and fiction in original format, assisted by instructor-prepared glossaries and other supplementary material. Readings to be followed by class discussion and short writing assignments in Arabic. Open to students at advanced proficiency in Arabic.
ARB 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Development of reading, writing, speaking, and listening skills in advanced Arabic. Materials may include al-Kitaab Part Two or Three, news articles and broadcasts, short stories, poetry, novels, essays, scripture, prophetic traditions, audio recordings, and television and film. 
ARB 297
Directed Independent Study
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.Restricted to graduate students.
Directed Independent Study on a topic culminating in a term paper. Independent Study may only be arranged with consent of the instructor when graduate seminars are unavailable. Topic varies by instructor.
ARB 299
Individual Study
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.Restricted to graduate students.

ARB 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.Restricted to graduate students.

ARE 018
Business Law
Sophomore standing.
General principles of business law in the areas of contracts, business organization, real property, uniform commercial code, sales, commercial paper, employment relations, and creditor-debtor against a background of the history and functioning of our present legal system.
ARE 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to lower division students.

ARE 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

ARE 100A
Intermediate Microeconomics: Theory of Production & Consumption
((ECN 001A C- or better or ECN 001AV C- or better);  ECN 001B C- or better);  ((MAT 016A C- or better,  MAT 016B C- or better,  MAT 016C C- or better) or (MAT 017A C- or better,  MAT 017B C- or better) or (MAT 021A C- or better,  MAT 021B C- or better)).Pass One open to Managerial Economics (AMGE), Animal Science and Management (AANM), and Textiles and Clothing (ATXC) Majors and Agricultural and Resource Economics (GARE), International Agricultural Development (GIAD), Viticulture and Enology (GVEN) and Transportation Technology and Policy (GTTP) Graduate Majors. 
Theory of individual consumer and market demand; theory of production and supply of agricultural products, with particular reference to the individual firm; price determination, and employment of resources under pure competition.
ARE 100B
Intermediate Microeconomics: Imperfect Competition, Markets & Welfare Economics
ARE 100A C- or better;  ((ECN 001A C-  or better or ECN 001AV C- or better);  ECN 001B C- or better);  ((MAT 016A C- or better,  MAT 016B C- or better,  MAT 016C C- or better) or (MAT 017A C- or better,  MAT 017B C- or better) or (MAT 021A C- or better,  MAT 021B C- or better)).Pass One open to Managerial Economics Majors (AMGE) and Agricultural & Resource Economics (GARE) Graduate Majors. 
Price determination, and employment of resources under conditions of monopoly, oligopoly, and monopolistic competition.
ARE 106
Econometric Theory & Applications
ARE 100A C- or better;  (STA 013 C- or better or STA 013Y C- or better);  STA 103 C- or better.Pass One open to Managerial Economics Majors (AMGE) and Agricultural & Resource Economics (GARE) Graduate Majors.
Statistical methods for analyzing data to solve problems in managerial economics. Topics include the linear regression model, methods to resolve data problems, and the economic interpretation of results.
ARE 107
Econometrics for Business Decisions
ARE 106;  ARE 100A C- or better;  (STA 013 C- or better or STA 013Y C- or better);  STA 103 C- or better.Pass One open to Managerial Economics majors; Pass Two open to majors in the College of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences.
Covers state-of-the art econometric and statistical methods for causal and predictive modeling with applications to finance and marketing. 
ARE 107
Econometrics for Business Decisions
ARE 100A C- or better;  ARE 106 C- or better;  (STA 013 C- or better or STA 013Y C- or better);  STA 103 C- or better.Pass One open to Managerial Economics majors; Pass Two open to majors in the College of Agricultural & Environmental Sciences.
Covers state-of-the art econometric and statistical methods for causal and predictive modeling with applications to finance and marketing. 
ARE 112
Fundamentals of Organization Management
Upper division standing recommended.Pass One restricted to Managerial Economics (AMGE) Majors and Agricultural & Resource Economics (GARE) Graduate Majors. 
Role of organizational design and behavior in business and public agencies. Principles of planning, decision making, individual behavior, management, leadership, informal groups, conflict and change in the organization. May be taught abroad.
ARE 113
Fundamentals of Marketing Management
ECN 001A or ECN 001AV;  For non-majors only.
Nature of product marketing by the business firm. Customer-product relationships, pricing and demand; new product development and marketing strategy; promotion and advertising; product life cycles; the distribution system; manufacturing, wholesaling, retailing. Government regulation and restraints.
ARE 115A
Economic Development
(ECN 001A or ECN 001AV);  ECN 001B.
Major issues encountered in emerging from international poverty, problems of growth and structural change, human welfare, populationgrowth and health, labor markets and internal migration. Important issues of policy concerning international trade and industrialization.
ARE 115B
Economic Development
(ECN 001A or ECN 001AV);  ECN 001B.
Macroeconomic issues of developing countries. Issues include problems in generating capital, conduct of monetary and fiscal policies, foreign aid and investment. Important issues of policy concerning international borrowing and external debt of developing countries.
ARE 118
Tax Accounting
MGT 011A;  MGT 011B;  ARE 018 recommended.
Development and application of a framework to understand the tax effects of typical management decisions on both entities and their owners. Impacts that different methods of taxation have on business entities with emphasis on tax planning, using income and deduction strategies, retirement plans, and choice of business entity for tax minimization.
ARE 119
Intermediate Managerial Accounting
MGT 011A;  MGT 011B.Pass One open to Managerial Economics (AMGE) Majors and Agricultural & Resource Economics (GARE) Graduate Majors. 
Use of accounting information by mangers in decision making, planning, directing and controlling operations. Focuses on managerial/cost accounting theory and practice. Covers costing systems, budgeting, and financial statement analysis.   
ARE 120
Agricultural Policy
ARE 100A C- or better.Pass One open to Managerial Economics (AMGE), Animal Science & Management (AANM) Majors and Agricultural & Resource Economics (GARE) Graduate Majors. 
Analytical treatment of historical and current economic problems and governmental policies influencing American agriculture. Uses of economic theory to develop historical and conceptual understanding of the economics of agriculture; how public policy influences the nature and performance of American agriculture.
ARE 120S
Agricultural Policy
ARE 100A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Analytical treatment of historical and current economic problems and governmental policies influencing agriculture. Uses of economic theory to develop historical and conceptual understanding of the economics of agriculture; how public policy influences the nature and performance of agriculture. May be taught abroad in Australia under the supervision of a UC Davis faculty member.
ARE 121
Economics of Agricultural Sustainability
ECN 001A C- or better or ECN 001AV C- or better.Pass One open to Majors in the College of Agricultural & Environmental Sciences and Graduate Majors.
Application of economic concepts to agro-environmental issues relevant to agricultural sustainability. Topics include market efficiency, production externalities, government policies, agricultural trade, product differentiation, all linked to sustainability issues. Case studies include biofuels, genetically modified foods and geographically differentiated products.
ARE 130
Agricultural Markets
ARE 106;  ARE 100A C- or better;  (STA 013 C- or better or STA 013Y C- or better);  STA 103 C- or better.Pass One open to Managerial Economics (AMGE), Animal Science and Management (AANM) Majors and Agricultural and Resource Economics (GARE) Graduate Majors. 
Nature, function, organizational structure, and operation of agricultural markets; prices, costs, and margins; market information, regulation, and controls; cooperative marketing.
ARE 130
Agricultural Markets
ARE 106 C- or better;  ARE 100A C- or better;  (STA 013 C- or better or STA 013Y C- or better);  STA 103 C- or better.Pass One open to Managerial Economics (AMGE), Animal Science & Management (AANM) Majors and Agricultural & Resource Economics (GARE) Graduate Majors. 
Nature, function, organizational structure, and operation of agricultural markets; prices, costs, and margins; market information, regulation, and controls; cooperative marketing.
ARE 132
Cooperative Business Enterprises
(ECN 001A C- or better or ECN 001AV C- or better);  (UWP 104A or UWP 104AY or UWP 101).Pass One open to Managerial Economics (AMGE) and Animal Science & Management Majors (AANM) and Agricultural & Resource Economics (GARE) Graduate Majors.
Study of cooperative business enterprise in the United States and elsewhere; economic theories of behavior, principles of operation, finance, decision-making, and taxation.
ARE 133
Introduction to Behavioral Economics
(ECN 001A C- or better or ECN 001AV C- or better);  (STA 013 C- or better or STA 013Y C- or better).Pass One open to Managerial Economics majors.
Inclusion of non-economic factors such as psychological principles in economic decisions and model predictions. Emphasis on behavioral principles, resulting strategies and implications for diverse market settings.
ARE 135
Agribusiness Marketing Plan Development
Upper division standing.
Fundamental components required to develop a marketing plan. Appreciation of the concept of marketing plans, appropriate researchrequired, including the use of library, Internet, survey and interview instruments, government documents, market analysis, business proposition, action planning, financial evaluation and monitoring.
ARE 136
Managerial Marketing
ARE 100B;  ARE 106;  ARE 100A C- or better;  (STA 013 C- or better or STA 013Y C- or better);  STA 103 C- or better.Pass One open to Managerial Economics (AMGE), Animal Science and Management (AANM) Majors and Agricultural and Resource Economics (GARE) Graduate Majors.
Application of economic theory and econometrics to the study of marketing and consumer research. Emphasis on industry structure, history, regulatory aspects, integrated brand promotion, market segmentation, optimal product mix, message placement.  
ARE 136
Managerial Marketing
ARE 100B C- or better;  ARE 106 C- or better;  ARE 100A C- or better;  (STA 013 C- or better or STA 013Y C- or better);  STA 103 C- or better.Pass One open to Managerial Economics (AMGE), Animal Science & Management (AANM) Majors and Agricultural & Resource Economics (GARE) Graduate Majors.
Application of economic theory and econometrics to the study of marketing and consumer research. Emphasis on industry structure, history, regulatory aspects, integrated brand promotion, market segmentation, optimal product mix, message placement.  
ARE 138
International Commodity and Resource Markets
ARE 100B;  ARE 100A C- or better.Pass One open to Managerial Economics (AMGE), Animal Science and Management (AANM) Majors and Agricultural and Resource Economics (GARE) Graduate Majors. 
Basic nature and scope of international trade in agricultural commodities, agricultural inputs, and natural resources. Market dimensions and policy institutions. Case studies to illustrate import and export problems associated with different regions and commodities.
ARE 138
International Commodity & Resource Markets
ARE 100A C- or better;  ARE 100B C- or better.Pass One open to Managerial Economics (AMGE), Animal Science & Management (AANM) Majors and Agricultural & Resource Economics (GARE) Graduate Majors. 
Basic nature and scope of international trade in agricultural commodities, agricultural inputs, and natural resources. Market dimensions and policy institutions. Case studies to illustrate import and export problems associated with different regions and commodities.
ARE 139
Futures & Options Markets
ARE 100A C- or better;  (STA 013 C- or better or STA 013Y C- or better);  STA 103 C- or better.Pass One open to Managerial Economics (AMGE) Majors and Agricultural & Resource Economics (GARE) Graduate Majors. 
History, mechanics, and economic functions of futures and options markets; hedging; theory of inter-temporal price formation and behavior of futures and options prices; price forecasting; futures and options as policy tools.
ARE 140
Farm Management
ECN 001A C- or better or ECN 001AV C- or better.Pass One open to Managerial Economics majors.
Farm organization and resources; economic and technological principles in decision making; analytical techniques and management control; problems in organizing and managing the farm business.
ARE 142
Personal Finance
ECN 001B.
Management of income and expenditures by the household. Use of consumer credit, savings, and insurance by households. Principles of tax, retirement, and estate planning.
ARE 144
Real Estate Economics
ARE 100A C- or better.Pass One open to Managerial Economics (AMGE) Majors and Agricultural & Resource Economics (GARE) Graduate Majors.
Economic theory, analysis, and institutions of real estate markets and related financial markets. Techniques for appraising property values. Cases drawn from the raw land, single family, multifamily, industrial and office real estate markets.  
ARE 146
Business, Government Regulation, and Society
ARE 100B;  ARE 100A C- or better.Pass One open to Managerial Economics (AMGE) Majors and Agricultural and Resource Economics (GARE) Graduate Majors. 
Variety, nature and impact of government regulation: anti-trust laws and economic and social regulation. Nature of the legislative process, promulgation of regulations, and their impact, especially as analyzed by economists.
ARE 146
Business, Government Regulation, & Society
ARE 100A C- or better;  ARE 100B C- or better.Pass One open to Managerial Economics (AMGE) Majors and Agricultural & Resource Economics (GARE) Graduate Majors. 
Variety, nature and impact of government regulation: anti-trust laws and economic and social regulation. Nature of the legislative process, promulgation of regulations, and their impact, especially as analyzed by economists.
ARE 147
Resource & Environment Policy Analysis
ECN 001A or ECN 001AV.Open to non-majors only.
Natural resource use problems with emphasis on past and current policies and institutions affecting resource use; determinants, principles, and patterns of natural resource use; property rights; conservation; private and public resource use problems; and public issues.
ARE 147M
Resource & Environmental Policy Analysis
ECN 001A or ECN 001AV.Open to non-majors only.
Natural resource use problems with emphasis on past and current policies and institutions affecting resource use; determinants, principles, and patterns of natural resource use; property rights; conservation; private and public resource use problems; and public issues.
ARE 150
Agricultural Labor
ARE 100A C- or better.Pass One open to Managerial Economics (AMGE) Majors and Agricultural and Resource Economics (GARE) Graduate Majors. 
Analysis of labor markets with focus on U.S. and world agriculture. Labor supply, demand, market equilibrium; why farm labor markets are different; global trends in farm labor; U.S. farm labor history; unions and collective bargaining; immigration policy. 
ARE 155
Operations Research & Management Science
ARE 100A C- or better;  (STA 013 C- or better or STA 013Y C- or better);  STA 103 C- or better.Pass One open to Managerial Economics (AMGE) and Animal Science & Management (AANM) Majors and Agricultural & Resource Economics (GARE) Graduate Majors.
Introduction to quantitative methods used to analyze business and economic processes: decision analysis for management, mathematical programming, competitive analysis, and other methods.
ARE 156
Introduction to Mathematical Economics
ARE 100B;  ARE 155;  ARE 100A C- or better;  (STA 013 C- or better or STA 013Y C- or better);  STA 103 C- or better.Pass One open to Managerial Economics (AMGE) Majors and Agricultural & Resource Economics (GARE) Graduate Majors. 
Linear algebra for economists; necessary and sufficient conditions in static optimization problems; implicit function theorem; economic methodology and mathematics; comparative statics; envelope theorem; Le Chatelier principle; applications to production and consumer models.
ARE 157
Analysis for Operations & Production Management
ARE 155;  ARE 100A C- or better;  (STA 013 C- or better or STA 013Y C- or better);  STA 103 C- or better.Pass One open to Managerial Economics (AMGE), Animal Science & Management (AANM) Majors and Agricultural & Resource Economics (GARE) Graduate Majors. 
Application of economic theory and quantitative methods to analyze operations and production management problems including process strategy, quality management, location and plant layout, and inventory management.
ARE 165
Emerging Economies & Globalization
ARE 100A C- or better;  ARE 115A;  ARE 115B;  Completion of ARE 106 & ECN 162 strongly recommended.Pass One open to Managerial Economics and graduate majors.
Economic drivers and policy challenges in the major emerging markets, with an emphasis on the effects of rising incomes, population growth, urbanization, and relative wages on world markets and natural resources.
ARE 166
Economics of Global Poverty Reduction: What Works & Why
(ARE 100B or ECN 100 or ECN 100B);  (ARE 106 or ECN 140);  (ARE 115A or ECN 115A).Pass One open to Managerial Economics (AMGE) and Economics (LECN) majors only.
Application of microeconomic theory and econometrics to understand causes of poverty and critically evaluate poverty alleviation policies in low income countries.
ARE 171
Principles of Finance
ARE 100A C- or better;  ARE 106;  MGT 011A;  MGT 011B.Pass One open to Managerial Economics Majors and Agricultural and Resource Economics Graduate Majors. 
Principles of corporate financial management. Time value of money, interest rates, principles of valuation, NPV, risk and return, and cost of capital.
ARE 171
Principles of Finance
ARE 100A C- or better;  ARE 106 C- or better;  MGT 011A;  MGT 011B.Pass One open to Managerial Economics Majors and Agricultural & Resource Economics Graduate Majors. 
Principles of corporate financial management. Time value of money, interest rates, principles of valuation, NPV, risk and return, and cost of capital.
ARE 172
Financial Management of the Firm
(ARE 171A or ARE 171);  ARE 106;  ARE 100A C- or better;  MGT 011A;  MGT 011B.Pass One open to Managerial Economics Majors and Agricultural and Resource Economics Graduate Majors. 
Financial analysis at the firm level: optimizing capital structure; minimizing the cost of capital; dividend policies; mergers and acquisitions; real options; and risk management.
ARE 172
Financial Management of the Firm
(ARE 171A or ARE 171);  ARE 106 C- or better;  ARE 100A C- or better;  MGT 011A;  MGT 011B.Pass One open to Managerial Economics Majors and Agricultural & Resource Economics Graduate Majors. 
Financial analysis at the firm level: optimizing capital structure; minimizing the cost of capital; dividend policies; mergers and acquisitions; real options; and risk management.
ARE 173
Capital Markets
(ARE 171A or ARE 171);  ARE 106;  ARE 100A C- or better;  MGT 011A;  MGT 011B.Pass One Open to Managerial Economics majors and Agricultural and Resource Economics graduate majors.
Introduction to asset pricing. Valuation and risk characteristics of financial assets, including stocks, bonds, futures, and options. Investors attitudes toward risk, capital allocation, portfolio selection, the capital asset pricing model, and the efficient market hypothesis.
ARE 173
Capital Markets
(ARE 171A or ARE 171);  ARE 106 C- or better;  ARE 100A C- or better;  MGT 011A;  MGT 011B.Pass One open to Managerial Economics majors and Agricultural & Resource Economics Graduate Majors.
Introduction to asset pricing. Valuation and risk characteristics of financial assets, including stocks, bonds, futures, and options. Investors attitudes toward risk, capital allocation, portfolio selection, the capital asset pricing model, and the efficient market hypothesis.
ARE 175
Natural Resource Economics
ARE 100A C- or better or ECN 100A C- or better or ECN 100 C- or better.Pass One open to Managerial Economics (AMGE) and Environmental Policy Analysis & Planning (AEPP) Majors and Agricultural & Resource Economics (GARE) Graduate Majors.
Economic concepts and policy issues associated with natural resources, renewable resources (ground water, forests, fisheries, and wildlife populations) and non-renewable resources (minerals and energy resources, soil). 
ARE 176
Environmental Economics
ARE 100A C- or better or ECN 100A C- or better or ECN 100 C- or better.Pass One open to Managerial Economics (AMGE) Majors and Agricultural & Resource Economics (GARE) Graduate Majors.
Role of the environment in economic activity and methods for protectingand enhancing environmental quality; implications of market failures for public policy; design of environmental policy; theory of welfare measurement; measuring the benefits of environmental improvement.
ARE 190
Topics in Managerial Economics
ARE 100A;  STA 103;  and Consent of Instructor.
Selected topics in managerial economics, focusing on current research.  
ARE 194HA
Special Study for Honors Students
ARE 100B;  ARE 106;  ARE 155 (can be concurrent);  and Consent of Instructor.  Minimum GPA of 3.500; major in Agricultural & Managerial Economics or Managerial Economics; senior standing.
A program of research culminating in the writing of a senior honors thesis under the direction of a faculty adviser.
ARE 194HB
Special Study for Honors Students
ARE 100B;  ARE 106;  ARE 155 (can be concurrent);  Minimum GPA of 3.500; major in Agricultural & Managerial Economics or Managerial Economics; senior standing.
A program of research culminating in the writing of a senior honors thesis under the direction of a faculty adviser.
ARE 197T
Tutoring in Managerial Economics
Senior standing in Managerial Economics and consent of Department Chairperson.
Undergraduates assist the instructor by tutoring students in one of the department's regularly scheduled courses.  
ARE 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.
ARE 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

ARE 200A
Microeconomic Theory
Graduate standing.
Linear and non-linear optimization theory applied to develop the theory of the profit-maximizing firm and the utility-maximizing consumer.
ARE 200B
Microeconomic Theory
ARE 200A.
Characteristics of market equilibrium under perfect competition, simple monopoly and monopsony. Emphasis on general equilibrium and welfare economics; the sources of market success and market failure.
ARE 200C
Microeconomic Theory
ARE 200B.
Uncertainty and information economics. Individual decision making under uncertainty. Introduction to game theory, with emphasis on applications to markets with firms that are imperfect competitors or consumers that are imperfectly informed.
ARE 202A
Introduction to Applied Research Methods
ARE 204A;  ARE 200A (can be concurrent);  ARE 256A.
Study of philosophy and methodology of applied research in agricultural economics. Methods of conceptualization of researchable topics. Method of communication and constructive criticism.
ARE 202B
Applied Microeconomics I: Consumer & Producer Behavior
ARE 200A;  ARE 202A;  ARE 200B (can be concurrent).
Application of consumer and producer theory in models of individual behavior and market-level phenomena. Implications of consumer and producer theory for specification of empirical models of supply and demand for inputs and outputs and market equilibrium displacement models.
ARE 202B
Applied Microeconomics: Consumer & Producer Behavior
ARE 200A;  ARE 200B (can be concurrent);  ARE 202A.
Application of consumer and producer theory in models of individual behavior and market-level phenomena. Implications of consumer and producer theory for specification of empirical models of supply and demand for inputs and outputs and market equilibrium displacement models.
ARE 202C
Research Design for Applied Microeconomics
ARE 240A;  ARE 202B.
Third of three courses in the Ph.D. level applied microeconomics sequence. Examines the design of empirical research and the application of econometric theory.
ARE 202C
Research Design for Applied Microeconomics
ARE 202B;  ARE 240A.
Third of three courses in the Ph.D. level applied microeconomics sequence. Examines the design of empirical research and the application of econometric theory.
ARE 204A
Microeconomic Analysis I
ARE 100B or ECN 100;  Advanced undergraduates with consent of instructor.
Behavior of consumers and producers and their interactions; tools and methods needed to analyze economic behavior in the marketplace.  Application of those methods to real-world problems.  
ARE 204B
Microeconomic Analysis II
ARE 204A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Behavior in imperfectly competitive markets--monopoly and price discrimination; oligopoly.  Introduction to noncooperative game theory.  Analysis of decisions made under risk and uncertainty and imperfect information.  The economics of externalities and public goods.
ARE 214
Development Economics
ARE 100A;  ARE 100B;  ECN 101;  ARE 204A and ECN 160A, ECN 160B recommended.
Review of the principal theoretical and empirical issues whose analysis has formed development economics. Analysis of economic development theories and development strategies and their application to specific policy issues in developing country contexts.
ARE 215A
Microdevelopment Theory & Methods I
ARE 200A or ARE 204A;  ARE 240A recommended.
Agricultural development theory, with a focus on microeconomics. Agricultural household behavior with and without imperfections and uncertainty. Analysis of rural land, labor, credit and insurance markets, institutions, and contracts.
ARE 215B
Open Macroeconomics of Development
(ARE 200A or ARE 204A);  (ARE 214 or ARE 215A);  (ARE 200D or ARE 205).
Models and policy approaches regarding trade,monetary and fiscal issues, capital flows and debt are discussed in the macroeconomic framework of an open developing country. Basic analytical focus is real exchange rate and its impact on sectoral allocation of resources.
ARE 215C
Microdevelopment Theory & Methods II
ARE 215A.
Extension of development theory and microeconomic methods. Agricultural growth and technological change; poverty and income inequality; multisectoral, including village and regional models. Computable general equilibrium methods and applications.
ARE 215D
Environmental & Economic Development
ARE 200A;  (ARE 204A or ARE 275).
Interdisciplinary course drawing on theoretical and empirical research on interactions between environmental resource use and economic development processes. Analysis of issues emerging at the interface of environmental and development economics.
ARE 222
International Agricultural Trade & Policy
(ARE 100B or ARE 204A);  ECN 160A;  Or the equivalent of ECN 160A.
Analysis of country interdependence through world agricultural markets. Partial equilibrium analysis is used to study the impacts of national intervention on world markets, national policy choice in an open economy and multinational policy issues. 
ARE 223
Economics of Agriculture
ARE 204A (can be concurrent);  ARE 256A (can be concurrent);  Or equivalent course(s) completed or concurrent required.Open to M.S. students in Agricultural & Resource Economics; Ph.D. students in Agricultural & Resource Economics and qualified students from other UC Davis graduate groups/programs.
Analytic treatment of the historical development and contemporary role of agriculture in the global, U.S. and California economies. Uses economic reasoning and evidence to develop historical and conceptual understanding of the economics of agriculture, agricultural issues, and related government policies.
ARE 231
Supply & Demand for Agricultural Products
ARE 200A;  ARE 202A;  ARE 240A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Analysis of supply and demand for agricultural commodities emphasizing the effective use of microeconomic theory with econometric methods, and other empirical procedures, in conducting applied analysis of supply and demand at the firm and industry level.
ARE 232
Agricultural Commodity Markets
ARE 200A;  ARE 202A;  ARE 240A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Economic analysis of industries that produce, market, transport, store, and process basic commodities. Analysis of market equilibrium under perfect and imperfect competition, with and without government involvement.
ARE 233
Agricultural Policy
ARE 200A;  ARE 202A;  ARE 240A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Nature, formation, evolution, and institutions of economic policy applied to food, agricultural, and rural issues. Examples for detailedconsideration include food security, commodity issues, and trade policy. Analytical approaches include static and dynamic welfare analysis, policy design, and political-economic analysis.
ARE 239
Econometric Foundations
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Prepares students for econometric theory and empirical work by examining the statistical foundation of econometrics. Special attention is paid to problems specific to non-experimental data common to social sciences. Topics from matrix algebra are also covered.
ARE 240A
Econometric Methods
ARE 239;  or Consent of Instructor.
Least squares, instrumental variables, and maximum likelihood estimation and inference for single equation linear regression model; linear restrictions; heteroskedasticity; autocorrelation; lagged dependent variables.
ARE 240B
Econometric Methods
ARE 240A.
Topics include asymptotic theory and instrumental variables, pooled time-series cross-section estimation, seemingly unrelated regression, classical hypothesis tests, identification and estimation of simultaneous equation models, cointegration, errorcorrection models, and qualitative and limited dependent variable models.
ARE 240C
Time Series Econometrics
ARE 240B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Probability theory; estimation, inference and forecasting of time series models; trends and non-standard asymptotic theory; vector time series methods and cointegration; time series models for higher order moments and transition data; state-space modeling; the Kalman filter.
ARE 240D
Cross Section Econometrics
ARE 240B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Estimation and inference for nonlinear regression models for cross-section data; models for discrete data and for limited dependent variables; models for  panel data; additional topics such as bootstrap and semiparametric regression.
ARE 240E
Topics in Time Series Econometrics
ARE 240C;  or Consent of Instructor.
Modern econometric techniques for time series data. Expand on topics covered in ECN 240A, ECN 240B and ECN 240C. Contents vary from year to year.
ARE 240F
Topics in Cross Section Econometrics
ARE 240D;  or Consent of Instructor.
Modern econometrics techniques for cross-section data. Expand on topics covered in ECN 240A, ECN 240B and ECN 240D. Contents vary from year to year.
ARE 254
Dynamic Optimization Techniques with Economic Applications
Elementary knowledge of ordinary differential equations.
Necessary and sufficient conditions in the calculus of variations and optimal control, economic interpretations, the dynamic envelope theorem and transversality conditions, infinite horizon problems and phase diagrams, local stability and comparative statics of the steady state, comparative dynamics.
ARE 255
Applied Dynamic Structural Econometric Modeling
ARE 254.
Covers structural econometric models of static games of incomplete information, single-agent dynamic optimization problems and multi-agent dynamic games, with a focus on applications to issues relevant to the environment, energy, natural resources, agriculture, and development.
ARE 256A
Applied Econometrics I
ARE 106 or ECN 140;  or Consent of Instructor.
First of two courses in the Masters-level econometrics sequence. The linear regression model and generalizations are applied to topics in applied economics. Tools for empirical research for problems requiring more sophisticated tools than standard regression models are emphasized.
ARE 256B
Applied Econometrics II
ARE 256A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Second of two courses in the Masters-level econometrics sequence. The linear regression model and generalizations are applied to a variety of topics in applied economics. Tools for empirical research for problems requiring more sophisticated tools than standard regression models are emphasized.
ARE 258
Demand & Market Analysis
ARE 204B;  ARE 256B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Application of theoretical material covered in ECN 204A and ECN 204B, with particular focus on production theory/factor demand and imperfect competition/market power. Use of theoretical models as a foundation for empirical economic analysis, and empirical exercises. Independent research on chosen topics, with empirical application.
ARE 271
Financial Economics
ARE 204A;  ARE 256A.
Risk, aversion, choice under uncertainty. Arrow-Debreu securities. Valuation and risk characteristics of financial assets, capital allocation, portfolio selection, Capital Asset Pricing Model, efficient market hypothesis. Applications to topics in agricultural, resource and development economics.  
ARE 275
Economic Analysis of Resource & Environmental Policies
ARE 204A.
Development of externality theory, market failure concepts, welfare economics, theory of renewable and non-renewable resource use, and political economic models. Applications to policy issues regarding the agricultural/environment interface and managing resources in the public domain.
ARE 276A
Environmental Economics: Externalities
Students should have completed the first year graduate level sequence in microeconomics and econometrics.
Introduces fundamental and recent research in environmental economics, focusing on the design, implementation and evaluation of environmental policy instruments to correct market failures. Exposure to economic theories and empirical techniques frequently used in this field.
ARE 276B
Environmental Economics: Non-Market Valuation
Students should have completed the first year graduate level sequence in microeconomics and econometrics.
Second Ph.D. field course in environmental economics, covering theory and econometrics of methods for valuing non-market goods and environmental quality changes. Topics include revealed preference (travel cost, hedonics, sorting equilibrium) and stated preference (contingent valuation, choice experiments, conjoint analysis) techniques.
ARE 277
Natural Resource Economics
ARE 254;  or Consent of Instructor.
Application of capital theory and dynamic methods to issues of optimal use of renewable and nonrenewable resources. Examination of policy issues associated with forests, fisheries, groundwater, energy resources, watersheds, soil, global climate, and wildlife.
ARE 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Graduate standing.

ART 007
Beginning Painting
ART 002;  or Consent of Instructor.
Introduction to techniques and concepts in the practice of painting.
ART 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to lower division students.

ART 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

ART 101
Intermediate Painting
ART 002;  ART 007.
Individualized projects exploring color and space in a variety of subject matter and approaches. Builds on basic skills and concepts from beginning drawing and painting courses. Study of historical and contemporary art in relation to studio practice.
ART 102A
Advanced Painting: Studio Projects
ART 101.Pass One restricted to Art Studio majors.
Sustained development of painting for advanced students. Approaches will vary according to the instructor.
ART 102B
Advanced Painting: Figure
ART 101.Pass One restricted to Art Studio majors.
Advanced painting using the human figure as subject.
ART 102C
Advanced Painting: Special Topics
(ART 002,  ART 007,  ART 101);  (ART 102A or ART 102B).Pass One restricted to Art Studio majors.
Special topics in painting for upper division students. Emphasis on development of a personal practice of painting informed by awareness of contemporary issues in painting and their historical background. Topics will vary with instructor.
ART 102D
Painting & Installation Art
ART 002 C or better;  ART 007 C or better;  ART 101 C or better;  or Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.Pass One restricted to Art Studio majors.
Expanded fields of painting and installation art in the context of contemporary art practice. Painting's possibilities in relation to space and pushing the boundaries of two-dimensional art.
ART 103A
Intermediate Drawing: Black & White
ART 002.Pass One restricted Art Studio majors. 
Advanced study of drawing composition using black and white media. 
ART 103B
Intermediate Drawing: Color
ART 002.Pass One restricted Art Studio majors. 
Study of drawing composition in color media.
ART 103C
Intermediate Drawing: 3 Dimensions
ART 002.Pass One restricted to Art Studio Major.
Intermediate study of drawing composition using three dimensional media.
ART 105A
Advanced Drawing: Studio Projects
ART 002;  (ART 103A or ART 103B).Pass One restricted to Art Studio majors.
Exploration of composition and process in drawing. Emphasis on the role of drawing in contemporary art and on drawing as an interdisciplinary practice. 
ART 105B
Advanced Drawing: Figure
(ART 103A or ART 103B);  ART 002.Pass One restricted Art Studio majors. 
Study of the figure through drawing of the model. Exploration of different methods and process of figure-drawing.
ART 110A
Intermediate Photography: Black & White Analog
ART 009.Pass One restricted to Art Studio majors.
Introduction to 35mm and medium format camera. Development of personal aesthetic and portfolio of black and white prints.
ART 110B
Intermediate Photography: Digital Imaging
ART 009.Pass One restricted to Art Studio majors.
Comprehensive introduction to all elements of digital photography, including scanning, imaging software and printing.
ART 110C
Intermediate Photography: Photographic Lighting
ART 009;  or Consent of Instructor.Pass One restricted to Art Studio majors.
Effects of lighting on photographic image. Ability to read, utilize, modify natural lighting conditions. Studio lighting equipment, and use of photographic studio. Photographic production management.
ART 110DA
The Photobook
ART 009;  or Consent of Instructor.Pass One restricted to Art Studio majors.
History and practice of photographic book. Sequencing, use of text and image, page layout and book binding techniques. Development of major photographic project.
ART 110DB
The Photobook
ART 009;  or Consent of Instructor.Pass One restricted to Art Studio majors.
Second course in ART 110D series. History and practice of photographic book. Sequencing, use of text and image, page layout and book binding techniques. Development of major photographic project.
ART 111A
Advanced Photography: Special Topics
ART 009;  (ART 110A or ART 110B).Pass One open to Art Studio majors.
Special topics related to photography and contemporary art practice. Multiple projects in a variety of approaches.
ART 111B
Advanced Photography: Digital Imaging 
ART 009;  ART 110B.Pass One restricted to Art Studio majors.
In-depth exploration of digital photography, including refined digital imaging techniques. Theoretical issues involved in digital media.  
ART 112
Sound for Vision
ART 012 or CDM 020 or CTS 020 or TCS 100.Pass One restricted to Art Studio majors.
Sound composition and development of an audio databank. Study of repetition and phase shifts. Creation of descriptive acoustic space recordings in combination with other artistic media. Audio as stand alone or accompaniment.
ART 113
Interdisciplinary Art
Upper division standing in Art Studio, Theater and Dance, Design, Technocultural Studies, or Music.
Experimental interdisciplinary strategies. Use of various media in creation of collaborative or independent works. Production of participatory audio-visual works, installations, or two dimensional explorations.
ART 114A
Intermediate Video: Animation
ART 012 or CTS 020 or CDM 020.Pass One restricted to Art Studio majors. 
Exploration of animation. Relationship between drawing, digital stills, and multiple images. Animation using traditional drawing techniques, collage, and digital processes.
ART 114B
Intermediate Video: Experimental Documentary
ART 012 or CTS 020 or CDM 020.Pass One restricted to Art Studio majors.
Experimental documentary practice. Use of interviews, voice-overs, and still and moving images. Production of alternative conceptual and visual projects.  
ART 114C
Intermediate Video: Performance Strategies
ART 012 or CTS 020 or CDM 020.Pass One restricted to Art Studio majors.
Use of video to expand performance art production. Exploration of improvisation, direction, projection, and image processing in real time.
ART 117
Advanced Video & Electronic Arts
ART 012 or CTS 020;  (ART 112 or ART 114A or ART 114B or ART 114C or CDM 100 or CDM 104);  (CDM 105 or TCS 100 or TCS 101 or TCS 104);  Upper division standing Art Studio majors.Pass One restricted to Art Studio majors; upper division standing.
Independently driven video, digital, and/or performance projects. Further development in the electronic arts ranging from video installation to performance.
ART 121
Reinterpreting Landscape
ART 002;  ART 007.Pass One restricted to Art Studio majors.
Interpretation of landscape through painting, drawing, and related media. Emphasis on the integration of historical, cultural, natural, and artistic contexts. 
ART 125A
Intermediate Printmaking: Relief
ART 011.Pass One restricted to Art Studio majors.
Woodcut linocut, metal-plate, relief, and experimental uses of other materials for printmaking. Additive and reductive relief techniques.
ART 125B
Intermediate Printmaking: Intaglio
ART 011.Pass One restricted to Art Studio majors.
Metal plate etching, aquatint, hard and soft ground, burin engraving and related printmaking techniques. 
ART 125C
Intermediate Printmaking: Lithography
ART 011.Pass One restricted to Art Studio majors.
Stone and metal-plate lithography and other planographic printmaking methods. Exploration of the basic chemistry and printing procedure inherent in stone lithogrphay.
ART 125D
Intermediate Printmaking: Serigraphy
ART 011.Pass One restricted to Art Studio majors.
Printmaking techniques in silk screen and related stencil methods. Development of visual imagery using the language of printmaking.
ART 129
Advanced Printmaking
ART 011;  ART 125A or ART 125B or ART 125C or ART 125D.Pass One restricted to Art Studio majors.
Development of intermedia printmaking. Advanced modes in print technologies: relief, serigraphy, intaglio, surface, as well as addition of digitized imagery. Production of prints using multi-plate prints and other methods.
ART 138
The Artist's Book
Completion of three upper division Art Studio (ART) courses.Pass One restricted to Art Studio majors.
Creation of an artist's book in an edition of three. Use of a variety of media.
ART 142A
Intermediate Ceramic Sculpture: Industrial Production Methods
ART 008.Pass One restricted to Art Studio majors.
Ceramic sculpture creation using two forms of industrial processes: plaster mold design, fabrication and casting; and extrusion with dies, including die fabrication.
ART 142B
Intermediate Ceramic Sculpture: Material Study
ART 008.Pass One restricted to Art Studio majors.
Study of ceramic materials and processes. Areas studied include clay and clay bodies; glaze materials through temperature, color and texture; history and technology of kilns and kiln firing. Examination of material properties and characteristics through experimentation.  
ART 142C
Intermediate Ceramic Sculpture: Special Topics
ART 008.Pass One restricted to Art Studio majors.
Exploration of the ceramic surface for creative expression. Use of glazing techniques including china paint, decals, luster, and silkscreen with underglaze and overglaze as well as the use of common materials such as epoxy, paint, oil and wax.
ART 143
Advanced Ceramic Sculpture: Studio Projects
ART 008;  ART 142A or ART 142B or ART 142C.Pass One restricted to Art Studio majors.
Experimentation with all techniques learned in prerequisite ceramics classes. Includes class projects in consultation with faculty. 
ART 147
Theory & Criticism of Photography
ART 009.
Development of camera vision, ideas, and aesthetics and their relationship to the fine arts from 1839 to the present.  
ART 148
Theory & Criticism: Painting & Sculpture
ART 005 or ART 007 recommended.
Study of forms and symbols in historic and contemporary masterpieces.
ART 150
Theory & Criticism of Electronic Media 
ART 024 recommended.
Study of electronic media, focusing on critique, application, and relationship to art practice. Analysis of the conceptual basis of electronic media as an artistic mode of expression. 
ART 151
Intermediate Sculpture
ART 005.
Individualized explorations through multiple projects in a variety of sculpture media and techniques. Builds upon technical skills and concepts covered in ART 005.
ART 152A
Advanced Sculpture: Studio Projects
ART 005;  ART 151.Pass One restricted to Art Studio majors.
Sculpture for advanced students. Emphasis on concept, idea development and honing technical skills. Approaches and projects will vary according to the instructor.
ART 152B
Advanced Sculpture: Material Explorations
ART 005;  ART 151.Pass One restricted to Art Studio majors.
Primary application and exploration of a single sculpture material chosen by the student. Examination of its properties, qualities, and characteristics for three-dimensional expression.
ART 152C
Advanced Sculpture: Concepts
ART 005;  ART 151.Pass One restricted to Art Studio majors.
Investigation of a specific idea chosen by the class. Relationship of idea to form and content. Individual development of conceptual awareness.
ART 152D
Advanced Sculpture: Metals
ART 005;  ART 151.Pass One restricted to Art Studio majors.
Technical aspects of the use of metals in contemporary art practice. Projects assigned to demonstrate the evolution of concepts and processes.
ART 152E
Advanced Sculpture: Site Specific Public Sculpture
ART 005;  ART 151.Pass One restricted to Art Studio majors.
Place and site specificity in contemporary sculpture. Individual and group work to conceive and fabricate sculpture in a public space.
ART 152F
Advanced Sculpture: Figure
ART 005;  ART 151.Pass One restricted to Art Studio majors.
Exploration of historical and contemporary approaches to the body in three-dimensions. Projects based on observational and conceptual strategies. Variety of media and techniques, including clay, wax, plaster, plastics, found objects, and others.
ART 152G
Advanced Sculpture: The Miniature & Gigantic
ART 005;  ART 151.Pass One restricted to Art Studio majors.
Exploration of scale, from the very small to the very large in a series of projects in a variety of media. Tools and techniques of enlargement and miniaturization.
ART 171
Mexican & Chicano Mural Workshop
CHI 070;  and Consent of Instructor.
The Mural: a collective art process that empowers students and people through design and execution of mural paintings in the tradition of the Mexican Mural Movement; introduces materials and techniques.
ART 190
Seminar in Art Practice
Upper division standing Art Studio major and completion of two upper division ART classes.Pass One restricted to Art Studio majors.
Introduction to professional practices. Development of an artist's packet including a resume, cover letter, artist statement, and statement of purpose. Ongoing independent studio work with group critiques. Research on galleries and museums, and readings in contemporary theory and criticism.
ART 195
Expanded Field: Artist Lecture Series
Consent of Instructor.
Exploration of the expanded field of practice, theory and criticism in the visual arts. Presentations and discussions with professional practitioners in the field. 
ART 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to lower division students.

ART 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

ASA 092
Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Enrollment dependent on availability of intern positions.
Supervised internship in community and institutional settings related to Asian American concerns.
ASA 102
Theoretical Perspective in Asian American Studies
ASA 001 or ASA 002 or ASA 003 or ASA 004;  or Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Explores major theories of race and its intersections with class, gender, and sexuality from interdisciplinary perspective. Introduces key theoretical developments, issues, debates. Through case studies, analyzes ways various theoretical frameworks and perspectives have been incorporated into range of scholarship. 
ASA 192
Internships
Consent of Instructor.  Enrollment dependent on availability of intern position with priority to Asian American Studies minors; consent of instructor.
Supervised internship in community and institutional settings related to Asian American concerns.
ASA 197T
Tutoring in Asian American Studies
Consent of Instructor.
Tutoring in lower division Asian American Studies courses in small group discussion. Weekly meetings with instructor.
ASA 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Primarily intended for upper division students.
ASA 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.
Special study for advanced undergraduates.
ASA 199FB
Student Facilitated Teaching
ASA 199FA.
Student facilitated. Under the supervision of a faculty member, an undergraduate student teaches a course under 098F/198F.
AST 025
Introduction to Modern Astronomy & Astrophysics
Good facility in high school physics and mathematics (algebra and trigonometry).
Description and interpretation of astronomical phenomena using the laws of modern physics and observations by modern astronomical instruments. Gravity, relativity, electromagnetic radiation, atomic and nuclear processes in relation to the structure and evolution of stars, galaxies and the universe.
ATM 010
Severe & Unusual Weather
High school physics.
Introduction to physical principles of severe and unusual weather: flood, blizzards, thunderstorms, lightning, tornadoes, and hurricanes. Emphasis on scientific perspective and human context. Not open to students who have received credit for ATM 100. (Former ATM 100.)
ATM 060
Introduction to Atmospheric Science
(MAT 016A or MAT 021A);  (PHY 007A or PHY 009A).
Fundamental principles of the physics, chemistry, and fluid dynamics underlying weather and climate. Solar radiation, the greenhouse effect, and the thermal budget of the Earth. Clouds and their formation, convection, precipitation, mid-latitude storm systems.
ATM 092
Atmospheric Science Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.
Internship off and on campus in atmospheric science. Internship supervised by a member of the faculty.
ATM 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

ATM 110
Weather Observation & Analysis
ATM 060.
Acquisition, distribution and analysis of meteorological data. Vertical sounding analysis, stability indices, probability of local severe weather, weather map analysis. Use of National Weather Service analyses and forecast products. Laboratory makes use of computer-generated analyses.
ATM 111
Weather Analysis & Prediction
ATM 110;  ATM 121B;  (ATM 111L (can be concurrent) or ATM 111LY (can be concurrent));  Knowledge of a programming language.
Tools for analyzing observed properties of mid-latitude weather systems. The analysis-forecast system, including various weather forecast models. General structure and properties of mid-latitude weather systems. 
ATM 111LY
Weather Analysis & Prediction Laboratory
ATM 111 (can be concurrent).
Subjective and objective analysis of weather data. Web-based learning of the analysis-forecast system and various weather forecasting situations. Weather map interpretation and forecast discussions.
ATM 112
Weather Forecasting Practice
ATM 110.
Formal practice in preparing local weather forecasts. Analysis of current weather conditions and recent model performance. Verificationand discussion of prior forecast. Interpretation of current forecast model guidance. Posting of forecast.
ATM 115
Hydroclimatology
ATM 060.
Examination of climate as the forcing function for the hydrologic system. Emphasis on seasonal variations in the relationship between precipitation and evapotranspiration for meso-scale areas. Watershed modeling of floods and drought for evaluating the effects of climaticfluctuations.
ATM 120
Atmospheric Thermodynamics & Cloud Physics
MAT 021C;  PHY 009B;  ATM 060 (can be concurrent).
Atmospheric composition and structure, thermodynamics of atmospheric gases, thermal properties of dry and moist air, atmospheric stability; cloud nucleation, cloud growth by condensation and collision, cloud models. 
ATM 121A
Atmospheric Dynamics
ATM 120;  MAT 021D;  PHY 009B.
Fundamental forces of atmospheric flow; noninertial reference frames; development of the equations of motion for rotating stratified atmospheres; isobaric and natural coordinate systems; geostrophic flow; thermal wind; circulation and vorticity.   
ATM 121B
Atmospheric Dynamics
ATM 121A.
Dynamics of fluid motion in geophysical systems; quasi-geostrophic theory; fundamentals of wave propagation in fluids; Rossby waves; gravity waves; fundamentals of hydrodynamic instability; two-level model; baroclinic instability and cyclogenesis.
ATM 124
Meteorological Instruments & Observations
ATM 060.
Modern meteorological instruments and their use in meteorological observations and measurements. Both standard and micrometeorological instruments are included.
ATM 128
Radiation & Satellite Meteorology
ATM 060;  PHY 009B;  MAT 022B;  MAT 021D.
Concepts of atmospheric radiation and the use of satellites in remote sensing. Emphasis on the modification of solar and infrared radiation by the atmosphere. Estimation from satellite data of atmospheric variables such as temperatures and cloudiness.
ATM 133
Biometeorology
MAT 016B;  one course in a biological discipline or consent of instructor.
Atmospheric and biological interactions.  Physical and biological basis for water vapor, carbon dioxide and energy exchanges with the atmosphere associated with plants and animals, including humans.  Microclimate of plant canopies and microclimatic modification such as frost protection and windbreaks.
ATM 149
Air Pollution
MAT 021D;  MAT 022B;  CHE 002B C- or better;  (ATM 121A or ENG 103 C- or better or ECI 100 C- or better).
Physical and technical aspects of air pollution. Emphasis on geophysical processes and air pollution meteorology as well as physical and chemical properties of pollutants.
ATM 150
Introduction to Computer Methods in Physical Sciences
MAT 022B;  PHY 009B;  computer programming course such as ECS 030; additional courses in fluid dynamics (ATM 121A or ENG 103) and in Fourier transforms (MAT 118C or PHY 104A) helpful but not required.Enrollment limited to 12, preference to Atmospheric Science majors. 
Computational techniques used in physical sciences. Integral and differential equation numerical solution: mainly finite differencing and spectral (Fourier transform) methods. Time series applications (time-permitting). Specific applications drawn from meteorology. Accelerated introduction to FORTRAN including programming assignments. 
ATM 158
Boundary-Layer Meteorology
ATM 121A.
Dynamics of the atmosphere nearest the Earth's surface. Friction and heat transfer. Properties of turbulent flows; statistical and spectral techniques; use and interpretation of differential equations. Emphasis on the importance to weather, air pollution, and the world's oceans.
ATM 160
Introduction to Atmospheric Chemistry 
CHE 002B.
Quantitative examination of current local, regional and global problems in atmospheric chemistry (including photochemical smog, acid deposition, climate change, and stratospheric ozone depletion) using fundamental concepts from chemistry. Basic chemical modeling of atmospheric reaction systems.
ATM 192
Atmospheric Science Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of 84 units.
Internship off and on campus in atmospheric science. Internship supervised by a member of the faculty.
ATM 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.  Three upper division units in Atmospheric Science.

ATM 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.  Three upper division units in Atmospheric Science and at least an overall B average.

ATM 215
Advanced Hydroclimatology
ATM 115.
Theoretical and applied aspects of energy and mass fluxes linking the earth's surface, atmosphere, and hydrologic system. Emphasis on regional scale analysis and modeling, spatial data representation, and climate change influences on precipitation and its hydroclimatic expression.
ATM 221
Advanced Atmospheric Dynamics
ATM 121B.
Conditions for instability in stratified atmospheres; baroclinic instability; forced topographic Rossby Waves; wave-mean flow interaction theory; tropical dynamics; stratospheric dynamics.
ATM 223
Advanced Boundary-Layer Meteorology
ATM 230.
Characteristics of the atmospheric boundary layer under convective and nocturnal conditions. Heat budget at the surface and boundary layer forcing. Similarity theory and scaling of the boundary layer. Measurement and simulation techniques.
ATM 230
Atmospheric Turbulence
ATM 121B or ATM 158.
Dynamics and energetics of turbulence in the atmosphere including vorticity dynamics. Statistical description of turbulence; Eulerian and Lagrangian scales, spectral analysis, conditional sampling techniques. Turbulent diffusion; the closure problem, gradient-diffusion and second-order methods.
ATM 231
Advanced Air Pollution Meteorology
ATM 160;  ATM 149A; course in fluid dynamics.
Processes determining transport and diffusion of primary and secondary pollutants. Models of chemical transformation, of the atmospheric boundary layer and of mesoscale wind fields, as applicable to pollutant dispersion problems.
ATM 233
Advanced Biometeorology
ATM 133;  or Consent of Instructor.
Current topics in biometeorology. Physical and biological basis for water vapor, other gases, and energy exchange with the atmosphere. Topics include modeling and measuring turbulent transport from plant canopies, surface temperatures and energy budgets, bio-aerosol physics and aerobiology.
ATM 240
General Circulation of the Atmosphere
ATM 121B.
Large-scale, observed atmospheric properties. Radiation, momentum, and energy balances derived and compared with observations. Lectures and homework synthesize observations and theories, then apply them to understand the large-scale circulations.
ATM 241
Climate Dynamics
ATM 121B.
Dynamics of large-scale climatic variations over time periods from weeks to centuries. Description of the appropriate methods of analysis of atmospheric and oceanic observations. Conservation of mass, energy and momentum. Introduction to the range of climate simulations.
ATM 250
Meso-Scale Meteorology
ATM 150;  Graduate standing; course in partial differential equations or consent of instructor.
The study of weather phenomena with horizontal spatial dimensions between 2.5 and 2500 kilometers. Methods of observational study and numerical modeling of the structure and temporal behavior of these weather systems.
ATM 255
Numerical Modeling of the Atmosphere
ATM 121B;  ENG 005;  ATM 150 recommended.
Principles of numerical modeling of the dynamic, thermodynamic and physical processes of the atmosphere. Hands-on experiments on model development using the shallow water equations and the primitive equations. Operational forecast models.
ATM 260
Atmospheric Chemistry
ATM 160.
Chemistry and photochemistry in tropospheric condensed phases (fog, cloud, and rain drops and aerosol particles). Gas-drop and gas-particle partitioning of compounds and effects of reactions in condensed phases on the fates and transformations of tropospheric chemical species.
ATM 265
The Art of Climate Modeling
ATM 121A.
Over the past fifty years, global models have given us incredible insight into the Earth system. Provides an introduction to these models, with a focus on their design and the science questions they have been built to address.
ATM 265
The Art of Climate Modeling
ATM 121A.
Over the past fifty years, global models have given us incredible insight into the Earth system. Provides an introduction to these models, with a focus on their design and the science questions they have been built to address.
ATM 280A
Air Quality Policy in the Real World
(ATM 149 or ECI 149);  ECI 242;  Consent of Instructor.  Or equivalent of ECI 242.
In-depth investigation of an air quality problem with a team and mentor from government or industry. Science, engineering and policy will be involved. Findings will be presented orally and in writing. (Deferred grading only, pending completion of sequence.)
ATM 280B
Air Quality Policy in the Real World
ATM 280A;  and Consent of Instructor.
In-depth investigation of an air quality problem with a team and mentor from government or industry. Science, engineering and policy will be involved. Findings will be presented orally and in writing. (Deferred grading only, pending completion of sequence.)
ATM 290
Seminar
Graduate standing in Atmospheric Science or related field.
Current developments in selected areas of atmospheric research. Topics will vary according to student and faculty interests.
ATM 291A
Research Conference in Atmospheric Science: Air Quality Meteorology
Consent of Instructor.
Review and discussion of current literature and research in Air Quality Meteorology.
ATM 291B
Research Conference in Atmospheric Science: Biometeorology
Consent of Instructor.
Review and discussion of current literature and research in Biometeorology.
ATM 291C
Research Conference in Atmospheric Science: Boundary Layer Meteorology
Consent of Instructor.
Review and discussion of current literature and research in Boundary Layer Meteorology.
ATM 291D
Research Conference in Atmospheric Science: Climate Change
Consent of Instructor.
Review and discussion of current literature and research in Climate Change.
ATM 291E
Research Conference in Atmospheric Science: General Meteorology
Consent of Instructor.
Review and discussion of current literature and research in General Meteorology.
ATM 291F
Research Conference in Atmospheric Science: Atmospheric Chemistry
Consent of Instructor.
Review and discussion of current literature and research in Atmospheric Chemistry. 
ATM 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

ATM 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

ATM 393
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Graduate standing.

ATM 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Graduate standing.

AVS 014L
Management of Captive Birds
Consent of Instructor.
One weekly discussion and field trip to study practical captive management (housing, feeding, equipment, marketing, diseases). Visit facilities rearing birds such as commercial parrots, hobbyist exotics, ostrich, raptors, waterfowl, game birds, poultry and pigeons.
AVS 016LA
Raptor Migration & Population Fluctuations
Consent of Instructor.
Identify raptors: study of effects of weather, crops, agricultural practices on fluctuations in raptor species and numbers. Familiarize with literature; design a project; survey study sites; collect, computerize, analyze data, compare with previous years. Species, observations, emphasis different each quarter. One Saturday field trip.
AVS 016LB
Raptor Migration & Population Fluctuations
Consent of Instructor.
Identify raptors: study of effects of weather, crops, agricultural practices on fluctuations in raptor species and numbers. Familiarize with literature; design a project; survey study sites; collect, computerize, analyze data, compare with previous years. Species, observations, emphasis different each quarter. One Saturday field trip.
AVS 016LC
Raptor Migration & Population Fluctuations
Consent of Instructor.
Identify raptors: study of effects of weather, crops, agricultural practices on fluctuations in raptor species and numbers. Familiarize with literature; design a project; survey study sites; collect, computerize, analyze data, compare with previous years. Species, observations, emphasis different each quarter. One Saturday field trip.
AVS 092
Internship in the Avian Sciences
Consent of Instructor.  Sophomore standing preferred.
Internship on and off campus in poultry, game birds or exotic bird production, management and research; or in a business, industry, or agency concerned with these entities. Compliance with Internship Approval form essential.
AVS 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

AVS 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

AVS 100
Avian Biology
BIS 002A;  BIS 002B;  ANS 002 preferred.
Biology of domesticated poultry, specifically chickens and turkeys. Avian genetics, immunology, reproduction, growth and development, broiler and layer management. 
AVS 103
Avian Development & Genomics
BIS 002A;  BIS 002B.
Unique features of avian development and genomics: Incubation; Staging; Egg Structure/Function; Fertilization; Pre-oviposital; Oviposition, Cold Torpor; Post-oviposital Development; Organogenesis, Growth; Sexual Differentiation; Extraembryonic Membranes; Mortality/Hatching; Genome Organization; Comparative Avian Genomics; Telomere Biology; Sex Chromosomes/Sex Determination; Advanced Technologies; Genome Manipulation; Mutations.
AVS 115
Raptor Biology
BIS 002A;  Or equivalent.
Study of birds of prey: classification, distribution, habits, migration, unique anatomical and physiological adaptations, natural and captive breeding, health and diseases, environmental concerns, conservation, legal considerations, rehabilitation, and falconry. Includes two Saturday field trips.
AVS 121
Avian Reproduction
BIS 002A;  BIS 002B.
Breeding cycles and reproductive strategies, egg and sperm formation, incubation, sexual development, imprinting, hormonal control of reproductive behavior and song. Species coverage includes wild and companion birds. Course has a physiological orientation.
AVS 123
Management of Birds
BIS 002A;  BIS 002B.
Captive propagation of birds, including reproduction, genetic management, health, feeding, artificial incubation, artificial insemination, and related legal aspects, including trade and smuggling. Emphasis on exotic species and the role of captive propagation in conservation.
AVS 149
Egg Production Management
AVS 011;  or Consent of Instructor.
Management of commercial table egg flocks as related to environment, nutrition, disease control, economics, housing, equipment, egg processing and raising replacement pullets. Offered in alternate years. One Saturday field trip required.
AVS 150
Nutrition of Birds
ABI 103 (can be concurrent) or BIS 103 (can be concurrent).
Principles of nutrition specific to avian species, including feedstuffs, feed additives, nutrient metabolism, energy systems, and nutritional support of egg production and growth. Use of computers for feed formulation to support production.
AVS 160
Designing & Performing Experiments in Avian Sciences
AVS 100 or WFC 111;  or Consent of Instructor.
Experiments in current problems in avian biology. Introduction to experimental design. Students choose a project, design a protocol, perform an experiment and report their findings.
AVS 170
Advanced Avian Biology
AVS 100 or WFC 111.
Ecology, behavior, functional morphology and lifehistory evolution of birds. Emphasis on the importance of body size as a principle determinant of most aspects of avian performance from lifespan to reproduction and species abundance. Analytical synthesis and critical thought emphasized. 
AVS 190
Seminar in Avian Sciences
Consent of Instructor.

AVS 192
Internship in Avian Sciences
Consent of Instructor.
Internship on and off campus in poultry, game birds or exotic bird production, management and research; or in a business, industry, or agency concerned with these entities. Compliance with Internship Approval form essential.
AVS 195
Topics in Current Research
Consent of Instructor.
Discussion of topics of current interest in avian sciences.
AVS 197T
Tutoring in Avian Sciences
Consent of Instructor.
Tutoring of students in lower division avian sciences courses; weekly conference with instructors in charge of courses; written critiques of teaching procedures.
AVS 198
Directed Group Study 
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to upper division students.
Directed group study. 
AVS 203
Advanced Avian Development & Genomics
AVS 103 (can be concurrent);  Graduate standing.
In consultation with the instructor, students develop a lecture and associated instructional materials, i.e., lesson plan, including justification, reading and presentation and evaluation aids. Topic must complement a topic covered in AVS 103.
AVS 290C
Research Conference
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Major professors lead research discussions with their graduate students. Research papers are reviewed and project proposalspresented and evaluated. Format will combine seminar and discussion.
AVS 297T
Supervised Teaching in Avian Sciences
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Tutoring of students in lower, upper division, and graduate courses in Avian Sciences; weekly conference with instructor in charge of course; written critiques of teaching methods in lectures and laboratories. 
AVS 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

AVS 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.

BCB 210
Molecular Genetics & Genomics
BIS 101;  MCB 121;  or equivalent courses.Pass One restricted to graduate students.
Emphasizes molecular genetic and genomic approaches to address fundamental biological questions. Introduces and emphasizes the strengths of prokaryotic and eukaryotic model systems and serves as building block for the BMCDB core courses, which use model systems to develop their themes.
BCB 211
Macromolecular Structure & Interactions
BIS 102;  Or the equivalent, or consent of instructor.Pass One restricted to graduate students. 
Conceptual and quantitative basis for macromolecular structure-function relationships. Investigation of the paradigm form follows function. Review of key elements of protein, nucleic acid, and membrane structure. Exploration of specific macromolecular associations by analyzing chemical structure and physical-chemical behavior.
BCB 212
Cell Biology
BIS 104;  Or the equivalent, or consent of instructor.Pass One restricted to graduate students.
Analysis of basic processes governing cell organization, division, and transport. Study of the integration and regulation of cell behavior in response to changes in cellular environment.
BCB 213
Developmental Biology
Undergraduate biology course or consent of instructor.Pass One restricted to graduate students.
Fundamental principles in embryonic development that guide application of modern cellular and genetic approaches to understand developmental mechanisms. Emphasis on experimental approaches used to critically address scientific questions.
BCB 214
Molecular Biology
BCB 211;  Or the equivalent, or consent of instructor.Pass One restricted to graduate students.
Investigation of the basic cellular processes in prokaryotes and eukaryotes that govern the central dogma of molecular biology (DNA-RNA-protein).
BCB 215
Graduate Reading Course
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.Restricted to graduate students.
Development of critical reading skills through study of major paradigm advances in specialized fields of biochemistry, molecular, cell, and developmental biology. Emphasis on active learning and student participation. Guided analysis of literature and major advances in field of study. 
BCB 220L
Advanced Biochemistry Laboratory Rotations
BCB 210;  BCB 211 (can be concurrent);  BCB 120L or the equivalent.Open to graduate students. 
Two five-week assignments in BMCDB research laboratories. Individual research problems with emphasis on methodological/procedural experience, experimental design, proposal writing and oral communication of results. 
BCB 251
Molecular Mechanisms in Early Development
Graduate standing or consent of instructor; introductory background in developmental biology and/or cell biology recommended.
Analysis of the early events of development including: germ cells and other stem cells, gametogenesis, meiosis, imprinting, fertilization, genetically-engineered organisms, egg activation and establishment of embryonic polarity with focus on cellular events including gene regulation and cell signaling.
BCB 255
Molecular Mechanisms in Pattern Formation & Development
Graduate standing or consent of instructor; introductory background in developmental biology and/or genetics recommended.
Genetic and molecular analysis of mechanisms that control animal development after fertilization.  Establishment of embryonic axes, cell fate and embryonic pattern; induction, apoptosis, tissue patterning. Critical reading of current literature in C.elegans, Drosophila, and mouse genetic model systems.
BCB 256
Cell & Molecular Biology of Cancer
BCB 210;  BCB 212;  BCB 213;  BCB 214.
Analysis of the pathologic alterations of cancer cells and therapeutic opportunities; with emphasis on animal models, tumor immunotherapy, stress response, metabolism, epigenetics, microRNAs and non-coding RNAs, and microbiota and inflammation.
BCB 257
Cell Proliferation & Cancer Genes
BCB 221C & BCB 221D or equivalent courses.
Genetic and molecular alterations underlying the conversion of normal cells to cancers, emphasizing regulatory mechanisms and pathways. Critical reading of the current literature and development of experimental approaches.  
BCB 290
Seminar
Consent of instructor and/or graduate standing.
Presentation and discussion of faculty and graduate-student research.
BCB 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Group Study
BCB 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.
Research
BCM 092
Internship in Biological Chemistry
Consent of Instructor.
Supervised work experience in biological chemistry and related fields
BCM 192
Internship in Biological Chemistry
Upper division standing; approval of project prior to internship by preceptor.
Supervised work experience in Biological Chemistry and related fields.
BCM 198
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
For undergraduate students desiring to explore particular topics in depth. Lecture and conferences may be involved.
BCM 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

BCM 209
Prostaglandins/Leukotrienes & Related Lipids
(BCP 101A and BCP 101B) or (PHC 101A and PHC 101B) or (PGG 100A and PGG 100B).
Oxidative desaturation/elongation of polyunsaturated fatty acids. Biosynthesis of prostaglandins/leukotrienes from polyunsaturated fatty acids. Chemistry, biochemistry, and metabolism. Nutritional regulation. Physiological/pathophysiological implications; pharmacological and clinical relevance.
BCM 217
Molecular Genetics of Fungi
PLP 130;  PLP 215X;  BCP 101B; BOT 119; GGG 100; GGG 102A; Graduate standing in a biological science; MIC 215 recommended.
Advanced treatment of molecular biology and genetics of filamentous fungi and yeasts, including gene structure, organization and regulation; secretion; control of reproduction; molecular evolution; transformation; and gene manipulation.
BCM 222
Mechanisms of Translational Control
BCP 201C or Consent of Instructor.
Molecular mechanisms of protein synthesis and translational control in eukaryotic cells, with emphasis on mammalian cells and their viruses. An advanced graduate-level treatment of topics of current interest, with readings and discussion of primary papers from the literature.
BCM 230
Practical NMR Spectroscopy & Imaging
CHE 107A;  CHE 107B;  (PHY 009A,  PHY 009B,  PHY 009C;  or PHY 005A, PHY 005B, PHY 005C) or consent of instructor.
Basic theory, experimental methods, and instrumentation of NMR. Enables understanding of NMR spectroscopy and imaging experiments.
BCM 231
Biological Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
MCB 221A;  Or equivalent or consent of instructor.
Principles and applications of magnetic resonance in biomedicine. Fundamental concepts and the biophysical basis for magnetic resonanceapplications in areas of tissue characterization/imaging, metabolic regulation, and cellular bioenergetics.
BCM 291
Seminar in Genetic Approaches to Pathogenesis of Human Disease
Student in Genetics Graduate Group or consent of instructor.
Current genetic approaches to understanding the pathogenesis of disease and mammalian development presented and critically discussed by faculty, fellows and students. Topics include Mendelian and non-Mendelian diseases, imprinting, homologous recombination, statistical methods, genetic epidemiology and cell cycle dependent expression.
BCM 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
For graduate students desiring to explore particular topics in depth. Lectures and conferences may be involved.
BCM 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.

BCM 410A
Molecular Medicine
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to Medical Students only.
Biochemistry of proteins and nucleic acids. Includes an introduction to cancer biology and a full discussion of carbohydrate metabolism. Molecular aspects of human disease are highlighted throughout.
BCM 491
Seminar in Genetic Approaches to Pathogenesis of Human Disease
Student in Genetics Graduate Group or consent of instructor.
Current genetic approaches to understanding the pathogenesis of disease and mammalian development presented and critically discussed by faculty, fellows and students. Topics include Mendelian and non-Mendelian diseases, imprinting, homologous recombination, statistical methods, genetic epidemiology and cell cycle dependent expression.
BCM 493
Medical Genomics
Consent of Instructor.
Four-week module will focus on the clinical methods and applications of medical genomics. Topics will include an introduction to the human genome and human genomics, genetic and epigenetic variation and the ethics of medical genomics.
BCM 497T
Tutoring in Biological Chemistry
Advanced standing or consent of instructor.
Assist instructor by tutoring medical students in preparation for one of the departmental courses that is a component of the required curriculum of the School of Medicine.
BCM 498
Group Study
Medical students with consent of instructor.

BCM 499
Research
Medical students with consent of instructor.
Research with Department of Biological Chemistry.
BIM 020
Fundamentals of Bioengineering
CHE 002B C- or better or CHE 002BH C- or better;  MAT 021D C- or better;  PHY 009B.
Basic principles of mass, energy and momentum conservation equations applied to solve problems in the biological and medical sciences.
BIM 020
Fundamentals of Bioengineering
(CHE 002B C- or better or CHE 002BH C- or better);  MAT 021D C- or better;  PHY 009B;  ENG 006.
Basic principles of mass, energy and momentum conservation equations applied to solve problems in the biological and medical sciences.
BIM 089A
Topics in Biomedical Engineering
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to lower division students.
Topics in Biomedical Engineering. (A) Cellular and Molecular Engineering.
BIM 089B
Topics in Biomedical Engineering
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to lower division students.
Topics in Biomedical Engineering. (B) Biomedical Imaging.
BIM 089C
Topics in Biomedical Engineering
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to lower division students.
Topics in Biomedical Engineering. (C) Biomedical Engineering. 
BIM 102
Cellular Dynamics
BIS 002A;  CHE 008B or CHE 118B.Open to College of Engineering students only.
Fundamental cell biology for bioengineers. Emphasis on physical concepts underlying cellular processes including protein trafficking, cell motility, cell division and cell adhesion. Current topics including cell biology of cancer and stem cells will be discussed.
BIM 105
Probability & Statistics for Biomedical Engineers
MAT 021D C- or better;  ENG 006 (can be concurrent).
Concepts of probability, random variables and processes, and statistical analysis with applications to engineering problems in biomedical sciences. Includes discrete and continuous random variables, probability distributions and models, hypothesis testing, statistical inference and Matlab applications. Emphasis on BME applications.
BIM 106
Biotransport Phenomena
BIM 020 C- or better;  (BIM 116 or NPB 101);  PHY 009B;  MAT 022B.Open to Biomedical Engineering majors only.
Principles of momentum and mass transfer with applications to biomedical systems; emphasis on basic fluid transport related to blood flow, mass transfer across cell membranes, and the design and analysis of artificial human organs.
BIM 106
Biotransport Phenomena
BIM 020 C- or better;  (BIM 116 or NPB 101);  PHY 009B;  (MAT 022B or MAT 027B).Open to Biomedical Engineering majors only.
Principles of momentum and mass transfer with applications to biomedical systems; emphasis on basic fluid transport related to blood flow, mass transfer across cell membranes, and the design and analysis of artificial human organs.
BIM 107
Mathematical Methods for Biological Systems
ENG 006 C- or better;  BIM 020;  MAT 022B.Restricted to Biomedical Engineering majors only.
Mathematical and computational modeling to solve biomedical problems. Topics include stochastic processes and Monte Carlo simulations, and partial differential equations. Introduced to numerical techniques in MATLAB.
BIM 108
Biomedical Signals & Control
MAT 022B C- or better;  ENG 006;  ENG 017.Restricted to Biomedical Engineering majors only.
Systems and control theory applied to biomedical engineering problems. Time-domain and frequency-domain analyses of signals and systems, convolution, Laplace and Fourier transforms, transfer function, dynamic behavior of first and second order processes, and design of control systems for biomedical applications.
BIM 108
Biomedical Signals & Control
ENG 006;  ENG 017;  (MAT 022B C- or better or MAT 027B C- or better).Restricted to Biomedical Engineering majors only.
Systems and control theory applied to biomedical engineering problems. Time-domain and frequency-domain analyses of signals and systems, convolution, Laplace and Fourier transforms, transfer function, dynamic behavior of first and second order processes, and design of control systems for biomedical applications.
BIM 109
Biomaterials
BIS 002A;  CHE 002C or CHE 002CH;  BIM 106.Restricted to upper division Engineering majors.
Introduce important concepts for design, selection and application of biomaterials. Given the interdisciplinary nature of the subject, principles of polymer science, surface science, materials science and biology will be integrated into the course.
BIM 110A
Biomedical Engineering Senior Design Experience
BIM 110L (can be concurrent);  BIM 111 (can be concurrent).Restricted to senior Biomedical Engineering majors (or by consent of instructor).
Application of bioengineering theory and experimental analysis to a design project culminating in the design of a unique solution to a problem. Design may be geared towards current applications in biotechnology or medical technology. Continues in BIM 110B.
BIM 110B
Biomedical Engineering Senior Design Experience
BIM 110A.
Application of bioengineering theory and experimental analysis to a design project culminating in the design of a unique solution to a problem. Design may be geared towards current applications in biotechnology or medical technology.
BIM 110L
Biomedical Engineering Senior Design Lab
BIM 105;  BIM 106;  BIM 108;  BIM 109;  BIM 116 or NPB 101.Restricted to Biomedical Engineering majors. 
Manufacturing processes, safety, computer-aided design techniques applied to fabrication of biomedical devices. Application of engineering principles & design theory to build a functional prototype to solve a biomedical problem. Continues in 110AB.
BIM 110L
Biomedical Engineering Senior Design Lab
BIM 105;  BIM 106;  BIM 108;  BIM 109;  (BIM 116 or NPB 101).Restricted to Biomedical Engineering majors. 
Manufacturing processes, safety, computer-aided design techniques applied to fabrication of biomedical devices. 
BIM 111
Biomedical Instrumentation Laboratory
BIM 105;  BIM 108;  (ENG 100 or EEC 100);  (BIM 116 or NPB 101).Open to Biomedical Engineering majors only.
Basic biomedical signals and sensors. Topics include analog and digital records using electronic, hydrodynamic, and optical sensors, and measurements made at cellular, tissue and whole organism level.  
BIM 116
Physiology for Biomedical Engineers 
BIS 002A C- or better;  PHY 009C;  MAT 022B recommended.
Basic human physiology for the nervous, musculoskeletal, cardiovascular, respiratory, gastrointestinal, renal, and endocrine systems. Emphasis on small group design projects and presentations in interdisciplinary topics relating biomedical engineering to medical diagnostic and therapeutic applications.
BIM 117
Modeling Strategies for Biomedical Engineering
BIS 002A C- or better;  MAT 022A C- or better.Restricted to upper division standing.
Non-simulation strategies for modeling biomedical engineering systems, including natural and synthetic systems at the cell and molecular level. Formulating and testing hypotheses by translating real-world problems into appropriate mathematical models, translating mathematical results into real-world understanding, and gaining appreciation for how models contribute to the development cycle of biomedical engineering applications.  
BIM 118
Microelectromechanical Systems
CHE 002A;  ENG 017.Pass One restricted to upper division standing in Biomedical Engineering.
Introduction to the theory and practice of micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS), including fundamentals of micro-nanofabrication, microscale sensing and actuation, self assembly, microfluidics and lab-on-a-chip. Weekly hands-on laboratory sections are emphasized on implementation and utilization of MEMS technologies.
BIM 120
Introduction to Materials Science for Biomedical Engineers
BIM 020 C- or better or ENG 105 C- or better;  PHY 009C;  MAT 022B recommended.Open to upper division BME students only.
Historical perspective on materials usage in the body. Fundamental properties of materials and key considerations needed for material selection in the context of biomedical applications. Case studies of commonly used biomaterials spanning a range of material types. 
BIM 120
Introduction to Materials Science for Biomedical Engineers
(BIM 020 C- or better or ENG 105 C- or better);  PHY 009C;  MAT 022B or MAT 27B recommended.Open to upper division Biomedical Engineering students only.
Historical perspective on materials usage in the body. Fundamental properties of materials and key considerations needed for material selection in the context of biomedical applications. Case studies of commonly used biomaterials spanning a range of material types. 
BIM 125
Introduction to Design & Analysis of Experiments for BME
BIM 105 or STA 100.
Basic concepts and methods in design of experiments with biomedical engineering applications. Statistical concepts and methods to study strategies to design efficient industrial experiments that can improve data quality and simplify data analysis. 
BIM 126
Tissue Mechanics
EXB 103 or ENG 045 or ENG 045Y.
Structural and mechanical properties of biological tissues, including bone, cartilage, ligaments, tendons, nerves, and skeletal muscle.
BIM 140
Protein Engineering
BIS 002A.
Introduction to protein structure and function. Modern methods for designing, producing, and characterizing novel proteins and peptides. Design strategies, computer modeling, heterologous expression, in vitro mutagenesis. Protein crystallography, spectroscopic and calorimetric methods for characterization, and other techniques.
BIM 140L
Protein Engineering Laboratory
BIM 140 (can be concurrent);  Concurrent enrollment in BIM 140 required.
Optional hands-on laboratory for BIM 140. Students use the engineering design process to design, build, and test a solution to a practical problem in the field of protein engineering. Problems change each offering. 
BIM 141
Cell & Tissue Mechanics
PHY 009B;  ENG 006;  ENG 035.
Mechanical properties that govern blood flow in the microcirculation. Concepts in blood rheology and cell and tissue viscoelasticity, biophysical aspects of cell migration, adhesion, and motility.
BIM 142
Principles & Practices of Biomedical Imaging
BIM 108 (can be concurrent);  MAT 022B.
Basic physics, engineering principles, and applications of biomedical imaging techniques including x-ray imaging, computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, ultrasound and nuclear imaging.
BIM 142
Principles & Practices of Biomedical Imaging
BIM 108 (can be concurrent);  (MAT 022B or MAT 027B).
Basic physics, engineering principles, and applications of biomedical imaging techniques including x-ray imaging, computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, ultrasound and nuclear imaging.
BIM 143
Biomolecular Systems Engineering: Synthetic Biology
BIS 002A;  (MAT 016C or MAT 017C or MAT 021C).
Includes analysis, design, construction and characterization of molecular systems. Process and biological parts standardization, computer aided design, gene synthesis, directed evolution, protein engineering, issues of human practice, biological safety, security, innovation, and ethics are covered.
BIM 143L
Synthetic Biology Laboratory
BIM 143 (can be concurrent);  Concurrent enrollment in BIM 143 required.
Optional hands-on laboratory for BIM 143. Students solve a practical problem in the field of synthetic biology by designing, building, and testing an appropriate solution or product. Problems change each offering.
BIM 144
Fundamentals of Biophotonics & Bioimaging
MAT 022B;  PHY 009B;  or Consent of Instructor.  BIM 108 or equivalent helpful; Biology or Physiology course recommended.
Biophotonics and bioimaging, emphasizing quantitative description of light propagation & light tissue interactions. Key technologies and illustrative applications in basic research, clinical diagnostics and therapy. 
BIM 144
Fundamentals of Biophotonics & Bioimaging
PHY 009B;  (MAT 022B or MAT 027B);  or Consent of Instructor.  BIM 108 or equivalent helpful; Biology or Physiology course recommended.
Biophotonics and bioimaging, emphasizing quantitative description of light propagation & light tissue interactions. Key technologies and illustrative applications in basic research, clinical diagnostics and therapy. 
BIM 145
Immuno-Engineering
BIM 161A or BIS 102.
Basic immunology and immunological tools. Survey of current immuno-therapeutic strategies. Ongoing research efforts to engineer the immune system for positive diagnostic and therapeutic outcomes.
BIM 151
Mechanics of DNA
BIS 002A;  MAT 022B.
Structural, mechanical and dynamic properties of DNA. Topics include DNA structures and their mechanical properties, in vivo topological constraints on DNA, mechanical and thermodynamic equilibria, DNA dynamics, and their roles in normal and pathological biological processes.
BIM 152
Molecular Control of Biosystems
BIS 002A;  PHY 009B;  MAT 022B.
Fundamentals of molecular biomedicine covering state-of-the-art methods for quantitative understanding of gene regulation and signal transduction networks at different levels of organization in health and disease. Topics include classic genetic systems, synthetic circuits, networks disrupted in disease and cancer.
BIM 152
Molecular Control of Biosystems
BIS 002A;  PHY 009B;  (MAT 022B or MAT 027B).
Fundamentals of molecular biomedicine covering state-of-the-art methods for quantitative understanding of gene regulation and signal transduction networks at different levels of organization in health and disease. Topics include classic genetic systems, synthetic circuits, networks disrupted in disease and cancer.
BIM 161A
Biomolecular Engineering
BIS 002A;  CHE 008B or CHE 118B.Restricted to upper division standing.
Introduction to the basic concepts and techniques of biomolecular engineering such as recombinant DNA technology, protein engineering, and molecular diagnostics.
BIM 161L
Biomolecular Engineering Laboratory
BIM 161A or BIS 101.
Introduction to the basic techniques in biomolecular engineering. Lectures, laboratory, and discussion sessions will cover basic techniques in DNA cloning, bacterial cell culture, gene regulation, protein expression, and data analysis.
BIM 161S
Biomolecular Engineering: Brief Course
BIS 002A;  CHE 008B;  BIM 161L (can be concurrent).
Basic concepts and techniques in biomolecular analysis, recombinant DNA technology, and protein purification and analysis.
BIM 162
Introduction to the Biophysics of Molecules & Cells
MAT 022B C- or better;  PHY 009C C- or better.
Introduction to fundamental physical mechanisms governing structure and function of bio-macromolecules. Emphasis on a quantitative understanding of the nano- to microscale biomechanics of interactions between and within individual molecules, as well as of their assemblies, in particular membranes.
BIM 162
Introduction to the Biophysics of Molecules & Cells
PHY 009C C- or better;  (MAT 022B C- or better or MAT 027B C- or better).
Introduction to fundamental physical mechanisms governing structure and function of bio-macromolecules. Emphasis on a quantitative understanding of the nano- to microscale biomechanics of interactions between and within individual molecules, as well as of their assemblies, in particular membranes.
BIM 163
Bioelectricity, Biomechanics, & Signaling Systems
MAT 022B C- or better;  (BIM 116 or NPB 101).
Fundamentals of bioelectricity in cells, the calcium signaling system, and mechanical force generation in muscle. Combination of lecture and projects to promote learning of important concepts in hands-on projects using neurons and muscle as microcosms.       
BIM 163
Bioelectricity, Biomechanics, & Signaling Systems
(BIM 116 or NPB 101);  (MAT 022B C- or better or MAT 027B C- or better).
Fundamentals of bioelectricity in cells, the calcium signaling system, and mechanical force generation in muscle. Combination of lecture and projects to promote learning of important concepts in hands-on projects using neurons and muscle as microcosms.       
BIM 167
Biomedical Fluid Mechanics
BIM 106 C- or better;  NPB 101 or BIM 116.
Theories of fluid mechanics, including Navier Stokes Equation and Conservation Laws, will be presented to understand dynamics of human circulatory systems. Fluid dynamics will be analyzed using partial differential equations. 
BIM 170
Aspects of Medical Device Design & Manufacturing
Consent of Instructor.Open to upper division Biomedical Engineering majors only. 
Survey of medical device design & impact on manufacturing operations. Introduction to medical device design process & product lifecycle. Principles of Design for Manufacturability, Design for Lean Manufacturing, and quality management systems.
BIM 171
Clinical Applications for Biomedical Device Design
BIM 116 C- or better or NPB 101 C- or better;  NPB 101 recommended.Restricted to Biomedical Engineering majors only.
Clinical applications for biomedical devices with emphasis in the pathophysiology of common diseases as it relates to the biodesign process, biosensors principles, in vitro diagnostics, needs assessment, and regulatory considerations. 
BIM 173
Cell & Tissue Engineering
BIM 106 C- or better;  BIM 109 C- or better.
Engineering principles to direct cell and tissue behavior and formation. Cell sourcing, controlled delivery of macromolecules, transport within and around biomaterials, bioreactor design, tissue design criteria and outcomes assessment.   
BIM 174
Microcontroller Applications Lab
ENG 017 C- or better.Restricted to upper division BME students.
Hands-on design module to introduce microcontroller platforms, e.g., Arduino; programming microcontroller development board, use of external programs to support development of controlled systems, design of simple control systems.
BIM 176
Microfluidic Lab
CHE 002A;  ENG 017.Upper division standing.
Theory and practice of microfluidic and lab-on-a-chip (LOC) systems. Microfluidic theories, microfluidic functions and operations, microfluidic sensing, and organ-on-a-chip development. Laboratory sections emphasize implementation and utilization of modern microfluidic devices, interfacial phenomena, and digital and droplet microfluidics.
BIM 189A
Topics in Biomedical Engineering: Cellular & Molecular Engineering
Consent of Instructor.
Topics in Biomedical Engineering: Cellular & Molecular Engineering.
BIM 189B
Topics in Biomedical Engineering: Biomedical Imaging
Consent of Instructor.
Topics in Biomedical Engineering: Biomedical Imaging.  
BIM 189C
Topics in Biomedical Engineering: Biomedical Engineering
Consent of Instructor.
Topics in Biomedical Engineering: Biomedical Engineering.
BIM 192
Internship in Biomedical Engineering
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to upper division majors.
Supervised work experience in the Biomedical Engineering field.
BIM 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.
Special study for advanced undergraduates.
BIM 201
Scientific Communication for Biomedical Engineers
Consent of Instructor.
Designed to improve the written and oral communication skills of first-year graduate students through writing fellowship proposals, analyzing data, and critically reviewing research papers.
BIM 202
Cell & Molecular Biology for Engineers
BIS 104 or MCB 121.
Preparation for research and critical review in the field of cell and molecular biology for biomedical or applied science engineers Emphasis on biophysical and engineering concepts intrinsic to specific topics including receptor-ligand dynamics in cell signaling and function, cell motility, DNA replication and RNA processing, cellular energetics and protein sorting. Modern topics in bioinformatics and proteomics.
BIM 204
Physiology for Bioengineers
BIS 001A;  Or equivalent; graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Basic human physiology of the nervous, muscular, cardiovascular, respiratory, and renal systems and their interactions; Emphasis on the physical and engineering principles governing these systems, including control and transport processes, fluid dynamics, and electrochemistry. 
BIM 210
Introduction to Biomaterials
ENG 045 or ENG 045Y;  or Consent of Instructor.
Mechanical and atomic properties of metallic,ceramic, and polymeric implant materials of metallic, ceramic, and polymeric implant materials; corrosion, degradation, and failure of implants; inflammation, wound and fracture healing, blood coagulation; properties of bones, joints, and blood vessels; biocompatibility of orthopaedic and cardiovascular materials.
BIM 211
Design of Polymeric Biomaterials & Biological Interfaces
ENG 045 or ENG 045Y;  or Consent of Instructor.Open to upper division undergraduates or graduate students.
Design, selection and application of polymeric biomaterials. Integration of the principles of polymer science, surface science, materials science and biology.
BIM 212
Biomedical Heat & Mass Transport Processes
EME 165;  EBS 125;  ECH 153;  Or equivalent.
Application of principles of heat and mass transfer to biomedical systems related to heat exchange between the biomedical system and its environment, mass transfer across cell membranes and the design and analysis of artificial human organs.
BIM 213
Principles & Applications of Biological Sensors 
CHE 002C.
Biological sensors based on principles of electrochemical, optical and affinity detection. Methods for integration of sensing elements (e.g. enzymes) into biosensors and miniaturization of biosensors.
BIM 214
Continuum Biomechanics
BIM 141;  ENG 102;  Or equivalent.
Continuum mechanics relevant to bioengineering. Concepts in tensor calculus, kinematics, stress and strain, and constitutive theories of continua. Selected topics in bone, articular cartilage, blood/circulation, and cell biomechanics will illustrate the derivation of appropriate continuum mechanics theories.
BIM 216
Advanced topics in Cellular Engineering
BIM 214;  or Consent of Instructor.
Advanced research strategies and technologies used in the study of immune function and inflammation. Static and dynamic measurements of stress, strain, and molecular scale forces in blood and vascular cells, as well as genetic approaches to the study of disease.
BIM 217
Mechanobiology in Health & Disease
BIM 106;  BIS 101;  NPB 101;  Or equivalents.
Principles by which biomechanical forces affect cell and tissue function to impact human health and disease. Emphasis on cardiovascular system: structure and function, biofluid mechanics and mechanotransduction, disease mechanisms and research methods. Cartilage, bone and other systems; current topics discussed.
BIM 221
Drug Delivery Systems
BIM 204 recommended but not required.
Fundamental engineering and biotechnology principles critical for the formulation and delivery of therapeutic agents, including peptide/protein drugs and small molecules.
BIM 222
Cytoskeletal Mechanics
BIM 202.
Current topics in cytoskeletal mechanics including physical properties of the cytoskeleton and motor proteins, molecular force sensor and generator, cytoskeletal regulation of cell motility and adhesion.
BIM 223
Multibody Dynamics
ENG 102.
Coupled rigid-body kinematics/dynamics; reference frames; vector differentiation; configuration and motion constraints; holonomicity; generalized speeds; partial velocities; mass; inertia tensor/theorems;angular momentum; generalized forces; comparing Newton/Euler, Lagrange's, Kane's methods; computer-aided equation derivation; orientation; Euler; Rodrigues parameters.
BIM 225
Spatial Kinematics & Robotics
BIM 222;  C Language.
Spatial kinematics, screw theory, spatial mechanisms analysis and synthesis, robot kinematics and dynamics, robot workspace, path planning, robot programming, real-time architecture and software implementation.
BIM 228
Skeletal Muscle Mechanics: Form, Function, Adaptability 
ENG 035;  (ENG 045 or ENG 045Y);  MAT 021D;  Basic background in biology, physiology, and engineering; NPB 101 recommended.
Basic structure and function of skeletal muscle examined at the microscopic and macroscopic level. Muscle adaptation in response to aging, disease, injury, exercise, and disuse. Analytic models of muscle function are discussed.
BIM 232
Skeletal Tissue Mechanics
Engineering 104B.
Overview of the mechanical properties of the various tissues in the musculoskeletal system, the relationship of these properties toanatomic and histologic structure, and the changes in these properties caused by aging and disuse. 
BIM 239
Advanced Finite Elements & Optimization
ENG 180 or MAT 128C or EAD 115.
Introduction to advanced finite elements and design optimization methods, with application to modeling of complex mechanical, aerospace and biomedical systems. Application of states of the art in finite elements in optimum design of components under realistic loading conditions and constraints.
BIM 240
Computational Methods in Nonlinear Mechanics
MAT 128B or ENG 180 or EAD 115.
Deformation of solids and the motion of fluids treated with state-of-the-art computational methods. Numerical treatment of nonlinear dynamics; classification of coupled problems; applications of finite element methods to mechanical, aeronautical, and biological systems.
BIM 241
Introduction to Magnetic Resonance Imaging
PHY 009D;  MAT 022B.
Equipment, methods, medical applications of MRI. Lectures review basic, advanced pulse sequences, image reconstruction, display and technology and how these are applied clinically. Lecture complements a more technical course. BIM 246 can be taken concurrently.
BIM 242
Introduction to Biomedical Imaging
PHY 009D;  Electrical and Computer Engineering 106 or consent of instructor.
Basic physics and engineering principles of image science. Emphasis on ionizing and nonionizing radiation production and interactions with the body and detectors.  Major imaging systems: radiography, computed tomography, magnetic resonance, ultrasound, and optical microscopy.  
BIM 243
Radiation Detectors for Biomedical Applications
PHY 009D;  MAT 021D;  MAT 022B.
Radiation detectors and sensors used for biomedical applications.  Emphasis on radiation interactions, detection, measurement and use of radiation sensors for imaging. Operating principles of gas, semiconductor, and scintillation detectors.
BIM 246
Magnetic Resonance Technology
PHY 009D;  MAT 022B.
Covers MRI technology at an advanced level with emphasis on mathematical descriptions and problem solving. Topics include spin dynamics, signal generation, image reconstruction, pulse sequences, biophysical basis of T1, T2, RF, gradient coil design, signal to noise, image artifacts.
BIM 251
Medical Image Analysis
EEC 106.
Techniques for assessing the performance of medical imaging systems. Principles of digital image formation and processing. Measurements that summarize diagnostic image quality and the performance of human observers viewing those images. Definition of ideal observer and other mathematical observers that may be used to predict performance from system design features. Obtain hands-on experience in computer vision by completing individual Matlab assignments that they select from topics in the course.
BIM 252
Computational Methods in Biomedical Imaging
(BIM 105 or STA 120);  (BIM 108 or EEC 150A).
Analytic tomographic reconstruction from projections in 2D and
BIM 255
Nanoscale Imaging for Molecular Medicine
BIM 202 highly recommended; graduate standing.
Current and emerging technologies to visualize biological structures and processes at size scales = 100 nanometers  and their application towards the advancement of molecular medicine.  Technologies include superresolution optical microscopy, electron microscopy and tomography.  Emphasis on quantitative imaging. 
BIM 258
Advanced Biophotonics & Bioimaging
BIM 108;  PHY 108;  Or an equivalent undergraduate optics course to PHY 108.
Quantitative basis for biophotonics and bioimaging, with an emphasis on the physical and mathematical description of optics, light propagation, and light-tissue interactions. Advantages and limitations of various optical imaging and sensing technologies. Illustrative applications in diagnostics, basic research, and therapy.
BIM 262
Cell & Molecular Biophysics for Bioengineers
BIM 284;  Or equivalent; graduate standing; undergraduate students by consent of instructor.
Introduction to fundamental mechanisms governing the structure, function, and assembly of bio-macromolecules. Emphasis is on a quantitative understanding of the nano-to-microscale interactions between and within individual molecules, as well as of their assemblies, in particular membranes.
BIM 263
Optical Microscopy Hands-On
Consent of Instructor.
Informed use of an optical research microscope. Analysis of digitized images. Optical image formation and its limitations.  Laboratories on modern microscope usage and videomicroscopy techniques including optimization of recorded images and quantification of microscopic distances and displacements.
BIM 270
Biochemical Systems Theory
BIM 202 (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.
Systems biology at the biochemical level. Mathematical and computational methods emphasizing nonlinear representation, dynamics, robustness, and optimization. Case studies of signal-transduction cascades, metabolic networks and regulatory mechanisms. Focus on formulating and answering fundamental questions concerning network function, design, and evolution.
BIM 271
Gene Circuit Theory
BIM 270 or BIM 202;  and Consent of Instructor.
Analysis, design, and construction of gene circuits.  Modeling strategies, elements of design, and methods for studying variations in design.  Case studies involving prokaryotic gene circuits to illustrate natural selection, discovery of design principles, and construction of circuits for engineering objectives.  
BIM 272
Tissue Engineering
BIS 104 or MCB 121.
Based on morphogenetic signals, responding stem cells and extracellular matrix scaffolding. Design and development of tissues for functional restoration of various organs damaged/lost due to cancer, disease and trauma. Fundamentals of morphogenetic signals, responding stem cells and extracellular matrix scaffolding.
BIM 273
Integrative Tissue Engineering & Technologies
BIM 202;  BIM 204;  Or equivalent; strongly encourage completion of BIM 272 although not a prerequisite.Restricted to graduate standing.
Engineering principles to direct cell and tissue behavior and formation. Contents include controlled delivery of macromolecules, transport within and around biomaterials, examination of mechanical forces of engineered constructs, and current experimental techniques used in the field.
BIM 281
Acquisition & Analysis of Biomedical Signals
ENG 100;  STA 130A.Restricted to upper division engineering.
Basic concepts of digital signal recording and analysis; sampling; empirical modeling; Fourier analysis, random processes, spectral analysis, and correlation applied to biomedical signals.
BIM 284
Mathematical Methods for Biomedical Engineers
MAT 022B;  STA 130A;  Or consent of instructor; upper division biomedical engineering majors, and graduate students in sciences and engineering; priority given to Biomedical Engineering graduate students.
Theoretical applications of linear systems, ordinary and partial differential equations, and probability theory and random processes that describe biological systems and instruments that measure them. Students will be introduced to numerical solution techniques in MATLAB. 
BIM 286
Nuclear Imaging in Medicine & Biology
BIM 243;  or Consent of Instructor.
Radioactive decay, interaction of radiation with matter, radionuclide production, radiation detection, digital autoradiography, gamma camera imaging, single photon emission computed tomography, positron emission tomography and applications of these techniques in biology and medicine.
BIM 287
Concepts in Molecular Imaging
CHE 002C;  MAT 021C;  PHY 009D;  and Consent of Instructor.
Current techniques and tools for molecular imaging. Emphasis on learning to apply principles from the physical sciences to imaging problems in medicine and biology.  
BIM 289A
Selected Topics in Biomedical Engineering: Cellular & Molecular Systems Engineering
Consent of Instructor.
Selected topics in Cellular and Molecular Systems Engineering.
BIM 289B
Selected Topics in Biomedical Engineering: Biomedical Imaging
Consent of Instructor.
Selected topics in Biomedical Imaging. 
BIM 289C
Selected Topics in Biomedical Engineering: Computational Bioengineering
Consent of Instructor.
Selected topics in Computational Bioengineering.
BIM 289D
Selected Topics in Biomedical Engineering: Cell & Tissue Biomechanics
Consent of Instructor.
Selected topics in Cell and Tissue Biomechanics.
BIM 289E
Selected Topics in Biomedical Engineering: Analysis of Human Movement
Consent of Instructor.
Selected topics in Analysis of Human Movement.
BIM 290C
Graduate Research Conference
Consent of Instructor.
Individual and/or group conference on problems, progress, and techniques in biomedical engineering research. 
BIM 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Graduate standing.

BIS 002C
Introduction to Biology: Biodiversity & the Tree of Life
BIS 001B C- or better or BIS 002B C- or better.
Introduction to organismal diversity, using the phylogenetic tree of life as an organizing theme. Lectures and laboratories cover methods of phylogenetic reconstruction, current knowledge of the tree of life, and the evolution of life's most important and interesting innovations.  May be taught abroad.
BIS 002D
Introduction to Biology: Principles of Cell Biology & Physiology
BIS 002A C- or better.
Introduction to the essential principles underlying cellular organization and function, how the properties of cells give rise to complex cellular behaviors that contribute to tissue organization/function and the physiological paradigms that govern complex life. 
BIS 005
Exploring Biological Sciences
Consent of Instructor.Enrollment limited to first year CBS students.
Introduction to biology at UC Davis through discussions with faculty and speakers from industry and medicine. 
BIS 011
Issues in the Life Sciences
Consent of Instructor.  Enrollment limited to BUSP students.
The range of subjects and approaches in the field of biology, including both basic and applied research topics.
BIS 011L
Basic Life Sciences Laboratory
Consent of Instructor.Limited to Biology Undergraduate Scholars Program (BUSP) students. 
Basic laboratory skills in life sciences research, including microbiology, molecular biology, and genetics. 
BIS 020Q
Modeling in Biology
MAT 016B (can be concurrent).
Introduction to the application of quantitative methods to biological problems. Students will use a mathematical software package to tackle problems drawn from all aspects of biology.
BIS 020Q
Modeling in Biology
MAT 016B C- or better (can be concurrent) or MAT 017B C- or better (can be concurrent) or MAT 021B C- or better (can be concurrent) or MAT 021BH C- or better (can be concurrent).
Introduction to the application of quantitative methods to biological problems. Use a mathematical software package to tackle problems drawn from all aspects of biology.
BIS 023A
Genome Hunters
MAT 017A (can be concurrent) or MAT 021A (can be concurrent).
Hands-on, project-based introduction to genome-centric biology with specific focus on quantitative elements of associated experimental approaches. Measurement error and error estimation, experimental design, data analysis, model generation and fitting, and model-guided hypothesis generation and testing. Content covered through quarter-long interactive experiment to isolate an organism, quantitatively characterize its behavior, and sequence its genome.
BIS 023B
Genome Hunters
BIS 023A;  (MAT 017C (can be concurrent) or MAT 021C (can be concurrent)).
Hands-on, project-based introduction to modern computational and bioinformatics analyses using genome sequence data generated in BIS 023A. Genome sequence assembly and alignment, genome annotation, and genetic correlates of behavior. Additional topics may include scientific and societal implications of the availability and usage of genome information and genome manipulation, and real-life applications of genome analysis.
BIS 027A
Linear Algebra with Applications to Biology
MAT 017C C- or better or MAT 021C C- or better or MAT 021CH C- or better.
Introduction to linear algebra with biological, medical, and bioengineering applications. Matrix algebra, vector spaces, orthogonality, determinants, eigenvalues, eigenvectors, principal component analysis, singular value decomposition, and linear transformations. Computer labs cover mathematical and computational techniques for modeling biological systems.
BIS 027B
Differential Equations with Applications to Biology
BIS 027A C- or better or (MAT 022A C- or better,  (MAT 022AL C- or better or ENG 006 C- or better or EME 005 C- or better)).
Solutions of differential equations with biological, medical, and bioengineering applications. First and second order linear equations, phase plane analysis, nonlinear dynamics, Laplace transforms, and the diffusion equation. Computer labs cover mathematical and numerical techniques for modeling biological systems.
BIS 092
Internship in Biological Sciences
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.Restricted to lower division standing.

BIS 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Primarily for lower division students
BIS 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.Restricted to lower division standing.

BIS 101
Genes & Gene Expression
(BIS 002A C- or better,  BIS 002B C- or better);  (CHE 008A or CHE 118A or CHE 128A);  ((STA 013 or STA 013Y) or STA 100 or STA 102 or STA 130A);  STA 100 preferred.
Nucleic acid structure and function; gene expression and its regulation; replication; transcription and translation; transmission genetics; molecular evolution. May be taught abroad.
BIS 101D
Genes & Gene Expression Discussion
BIS 101 (can be concurrent);  and Consent of Instructor.
Discussion and problem solving related to fundamental principles of classical and molecular genetics as presented in BIS 101.
BIS 102
Structure & Function of Biomolecules
(BIS 001A or BIS 002A);  (CHE 008B or CHE 118B or CHE 128B).
Structure and function of macromolecules with emphasis on proteins, catalysis, enzyme kinetics, lipids, membranes, and proteins as machines. May be taught abroad.
BIS 102Q
Quantitative Biomolecule Concepts
BIS 102 (can be concurrent).
Study of the quantitative concepts and mathematical models fundamental to biochemistry.
BIS 102Q
Quantitative Biomolecule Concepts
BIS 102 (can be concurrent).
Study of the quantitative concepts and mathematical models fundamental to biochemistry.
BIS 103
Bioenergetics & Metabolism
BIS 102.
Fundamentals of the carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur cycles in nature, including key reactions of biomolecules such as carbohydrates, amino acids, lipids, and nucleotides, and of energy production and use in different types of organisms. Principles of metabolic regulation.
BIS 104
Cell Biology
BIS 101;  (BIS 102 or BIS 105).
Membrane receptors and signal transduction; cell trafficking; cell cycle; cell growth and division; extracellular matrix and cell-cell junctions; cell development; immune system.
BIS 105
Biomolecules & Metabolism
((BIS 001A,  BIS 001B,  BIS 001C) or (BIS 002A,  BIS 002B,  BIS 002C));  (CHE 008B or CHE 118B or CHE 128B).
Fundamentals of biochemical processes, with emphasis on protein structure and activity; energy metabolism; catabolism of sugars, amino acids, and lipids; and gluconeogenesis.   
BIS 107
Probability & Stochastic Processes with Applications to Biology
(BIS 027A C- or better or MAT 027A C- or better) or (MAT 022A C- or better,  (MAT 022AL C- or better or ENG 006 C- or better or EME 005 C- or better)).
Introduction to probability theory and stochastic processes with biological, medical, and bioengineering applications. Combinatorics, discrete and continuous random variables, Bayes formula, conditional probability, Markov chains, Poisson processes, and Brownian motion. Computer labs cover mathematical and computational modeling techniques.
BIS 122
Population Biology & Ecology
(BIS 001A,  BIS 001B,  BIS 001C) or (BIS 002A,  BIS 002B,  BIS 002C);  Residence at Bodega Marine Laboratory required.
Biological and physical processes affecting plant and animal populations in the rich array of habitats at the Bodega Marine Laboratory ecological preserve.  Emphasis on field experience, with complementing lectures to address population and community processes. See Bodega Marine Laboratory Program.
BIS 122P
Population Biology & Ecology/Advanced Laboratory Topics
BIS 122 (can be concurrent).Residence at Bodega Marine Laboratory required.
Training in scientific research, from hypothesis testing to publication, including methods of library research. Research will be related to a topic covered in BIS 122. Final presentation both oral and written. See Bodega Marine Laboratory Program.
BIS 123
Undergraduate Colloquium in Marine Science
Enrolled student at the Bodega Marine Laboratory.
Series of weekly seminars by recognized authorities in various disciplines of marine science from within and outside the UC system. Includes informal discussion with speaker. Held at Bodega Marine Laboratory; see Bodega Marine Laboratory Program. 
BIS 124
Coastal Marine Research
(EVE 114 (can be concurrent) or EVE 106 (can be concurrent) or ESP 152 (can be concurrent) or ESP 124 (can be concurrent));  Concurrent enrollment in one of the above listed courses required; upper division standing or consent of instructor.Student must complete the application at http://www.bml.ucdavis.edu.
Independent research on topics related to an accompanying core Bodega Marine Laboratory summer course. Receive training in generating hypotheses, designing experiments, collecting and analyzing data, and scientific communication.
BIS 132
Introduction to Dynamic Models in Modern Biology
MAT 016C;  (STA 013 or STA 013Y);  Or equivalents and one lower division course in biology or equivalent.
Dynamic modeling in the biological sciences, including matrix models, difference equations, differential equations, and complex dynamics. Examples include classic models in ecology, cell biology, physiology, and neuroscience. Emphasis on understanding models, their assumptions, and implications for modern biology.
BIS 133
Collaborative Studies in Mathematical Biology
MAT 016A;  MAT 016B;  MAT 016C;  (BIS 001A or BIS 001B or BIS 001C or BIS 002A or BIS 002B or BIS 002C or BIS 010);  and Consent of Instructor.  Or equivalents.
Interdisciplinary research and training that uses mathematics and computation to solve current problems in biology. 
BIS 134
Systems Biology: From Biological Circuits to Biological Systems
BIS 101;  (MCB 121 or MCB 161 or PLB 113);  (MAT 016A,  MAT 016B,  MAT 016C) or (MAT 017A,  MAT 017B,  MAT 017C);  or Consent of Instructor.
Applying systems theory to understand the properties of biological networks in a variety of model organisms. Emphasis on both local biological circuits, and genome-scale biological networks. Topics include network motifs, robustness, modeling, emergent properties and integration of networks.
BIS 134
Systems Biology: From Biological Circuits to Biological Systems
BIS 101;  (MCB 121 or PLB 113);  (MAT 016A,  MAT 016B,  MAT 016C) or (MAT 017A,  MAT 017B,  MAT 017C) or (MAT 021A,  MAT 021B,  MAT 021C) or (MAT 021AH,  MAT 021BH,  MAT 021CH);  or Consent of Instructor.
Applying systems theory to understand the properties of biological networks in a variety of model organisms. Emphasis on both local biological circuits, and genome-scale biological networks. Topics include network motifs, robustness, modeling, emergent properties and integration of networks.
BIS 180L
Genomics Laboratory
BIS 181 or BIS 183 or MCB 182;  or Consent of Instructor.
Computational approaches to model and analyze biological information about genomes, transcriptomes, and proteomes. Topics include genome assembly and annotation, mRNA and small RNA profiling, proteomics, protein-DNA and protein-protein interactions, network analysis, and comparative genomics. Computer programming experience is not required.
BIS 181
Comparative Genomics
BIS 101 C- or better;  or Consent of Instructor.
Comparison of genomes at the population and species level. Genomic techniques for mapping disease (and other) genes, reconstruction of evolutionary history and migration patterns, determination of gene function, prediction of organismal traits, and metagenomics: determination of community composition and function.
BIS 183
Functional Genomics
BIS 101;  (BIS 102 or BIS 105 recommended.).
Overview of genomic methodologies and key biological findings obtained using genome-wide analyses. RNA profiling, small RNAs, epigenomics, chromatin immunoprecipitation, protein-DNA interactions, proteomics and network analysis.
BIS 185L
Systems & Synthetic Biology Lab
BIS 015L C- or better;  BIS 134 C- or better (can be concurrent);  BIM 143 C- or better (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.
Principles & applications of systems and synthetic biology. Bistable & monostable switches, single cell sequencing, genetic circuits, design of biological parts and pathway modeling. Computational & experimental labs use single cell sequence data to determine switch types in cell identity, design and characterize promoter libraries and use genomics-enabled approaches to discover and characterize enzymes & metabolites.
BIS 192
Internship in Biological Sciences
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.

BIS 194H
Research Honors
Senior standing.
Students majoring in Biological Sciences who have completed two quarters (3-5 units per quarter) of 199 and who qualify for the honors program as defined by the current catalog. Opportunity for Biological Sciences majors to pursue intensive research culminating in the writing of a senior thesis with the guidance of faculty advisors.
BIS 195A
Science Teaching Internship Program
Upper division standing in a science major or consent of instructor.Major in science; junior or senior status (based on units); application and interview; limited to 24 students.

BIS 195B
Science Teaching Internship
BIS 195A.
Reinforcement of teaching techniques learned in 195A with additional classroom experience in K-12 science classrooms wirking with a master teacher observing, assisting with labs and activities, managing students and teaching lessons.
BIS 197T
Tutoring in Biological Sciences
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Assisting the instructor by tutoring students in one of the Biological Sciences' regular courses.  
BIS 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.
BIS 199
Special Study in Biological Sciences
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.

BIS 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
College of Biological Sciences staff members offer group study courses under this number.
BIT 092
Internship in Biotechnology 
Consent of Instructor.
Work experience on or off campus in subject area pertaining to biotechnology or in a business, industry or agency associated withbiotechnology. Internship supervised by faculty member in the animal or plant sciences.
BIT 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study.
BIT 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

BIT 150
Applied Bioinformatics 
BIS 101;  (ECS 010 or ECS 015 or PLS 021);  (PLS 120 or STA 013 or STA 013Y or STA 100);  or Consent of Instructor.Limited enrollment.
Concepts and programs needed to apply bioinformatics in biotechnology research. Sequence analysis and annotation and use of plant and animal databases for students in biological and agricultural sciences. 
BIT 160
Principles of Plant Biotechnology
(BIS 001A or BIS 002A);  (BIS 101 or PLS 152).
Principles and concepts of plant biotechnology including recombinant DNA technology, molecular biology, genomics, cell and tissue culture, gene transfer and crop improvement strategies using transgenic crops.
BIT 161A
Genetics & Biotechnology Laboratory
PLS 152 or BIS 101;  and Consent of Instructor.
Techniques of genetic analysis at the molecular level including recombinant DNA, gene mapping and basic computational biology. 
BIT 161B
Plant Genetics & Biotechnology Laboratory
PLS 152 or BIS 101;  and Consent of Instructor.
Advanced techniques of genetic analysis at the molecular and cellular levels, including transformation, gene expression and analysis of transgenic plants.
BIT 171
Professionalism & Ethics in Genomics & Biotechnology
Upper division standing in a natural science major.
Real and hypothetical case studies to illustrate ethical issues in genomics and biotechnology. Training and practice in difficult ethical situations and evaluating personal and social consequences.
BIT 188
Undergraduate Research Proposal
Upper division standing.
Preparation and review of a scientific proposal. Problem definition, identification of objectives, literature survey, hypothesis generation, design of experiments, data analysis planning, proposal outline and preparation.
BIT 189L
Laboratory Research in Genomics & Biotechnology
BIT 188;  and Consent of Instructor.
Formulating experimental approaches to current questions in biotechnology; performance of proposed experiments.
BIT 192
Internship in Biotechnology
Consent of Instructor.
Work experience on or off campus in a subject area pertaining to biotechnology or in a business, industry or agency associated with biotechnology. Internship supervised by faculty member in the animal or plant sciences.
BIT 194H
Honors Thesis in Biotechnology
BIT 188;  BIT 189L;  Consent of Instructor.  Senior standing in Biotechnology with 3.250 GPA or higher.
Independent study of selected topics under the direction of a member or members of the staff. Completion will involve the writing of a senior thesis.
BIT 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study.
BIT 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

BPH 200A
Current Techniques in Biophysics
BIS 102;  CHE 110A;  Or equivalents.
Current Techniques in Biophysics. Topics include mathematical methods, modeling, mass spectrometry, stochastic process, scanning probe microscopy, electron microscopy, fluorescence, membrane diffusion/mechanics, and single particle tracking.   
BPH 200B
Current Techniques in Biophysics
CHE 110A;  BIS 102;  Or equivalent of BIS 102.
Current Techniques in Biophysics. Topics include protein folding, membrane structure and dynamics, Raman spectroscopy, fluorescence resonance energy transfer, time resolved fluorescence, quantum dot, fluorescence imaging,esr, high resolution nmr, and in vivo nmr.
BPH 200LA
Biophysics Laboratory
BPH 200 (can be concurrent).
One five-week laboratory assignment in the research laboratory of a Biophysics Graduate Group faculty member. Individual research problems with emphasis on methodological/procedural experience and experimental design.
BPH 200LB
Biophysics Laboratory
BPH 200 (can be concurrent).
Two five-week laboratory assignments in the research laboratories of Biophysics Graduate Group faculty members. Individual research problems with emphasis on methodological/procedural experience and experimental design.
BPH 231
Biological Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
MCB 221A;  or Consent of Instructor.  Or the equivalent.
Principles and applications of magnetic resonance in biomedicine. Fundamental concepts and the biophysical basis for magnetic resonanceapplications in areas of tissue characterization/imaging, metabolic regulation, and cellular bioenergetics.
BPH 241
Membrane Biology
BIS 102;  BIS 103;  BIS 104;  or Consent of Instructor.
Advanced topics on membrane biochemistry and biophysics.  Relationship of the unique properties of biomembranes to their roles in cell biology and physiology.  
BPH 255
Nanoscale Imaging for Molecular Medicine
BIM 202 highly recommended; graduate standing.
Current and emerging technologies to visualize biological structures and processes at size scales = 100 nanometers  and their application towards the advancement of molecular medicine.  Technologies include superresolution optical microscopy electron microscopy and tomography.  Emphasis on quantitative imaging.
BPH 271
Optical Methods in Biophysics
BIS 102;  EAD 108B;  CHE 110A;  Or equivalents.
Principal optical techniques used to study biological structures and their related functions. Specific optical techniques useful in the studies of protein-nucleic acid, protein-membrane and protein-protein interactions. Biomedical applications of optical techniques.
BPH 290
Biophysics Seminar
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Presentation of current research by experts in biophysics.
BPH 290C
Research Conference in Biophysics
BPH 299 (can be concurrent);  Graduate standing in Biophysics and/or consent of instructor.
Presentation and discussion of faculty and graduate-student research in biophysics.
BPT 201
Current Topics in Biophotonics & Bioimaging Research
Consent of Instructor.
Designed to help graduate students develop and maintain familiarity with the current and past literature in the field of Biophotonics and Bioimaging research and related areas.
BST 222
Biostatistics: Survival Analysis
STA 131C.
Incomplete data; life tables; nonparametric methods; parametric methods; accelerated failure time models; proportional hazards models; partial likelihood; advanced topics.
BST 223
Biostatistics: Generalized Linear Models
STA 131C.
Likelihood and linear regression; generalized linear model; Binomial regression; case-control studies; dose-response and bioassay; Poisson regression; Gamma regression; quasi-likelihood models; estimating equations; multivariate GLMs.
BST 224
Analysis of Longitudinal Data
(BST 222 or STA 222);  (BST 223 or STA 223);  STA 232B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Standard and advanced methodology, theory, algorithms, and applications relevant for analysis of repeated measurements and longitudinal data in biostatistical and statistical settings.
BST 225
Clinical Trials
BST 223 or STA 223;  or Consent of Instructor.
Basic statistical principles of clinical designs, including bias, randomization, blocking, and masking. Practical applications of widely-used designs, including dose-finding, comparative and cluster randomization designs. Advanced statistical procedures for analysis of data collected in clinical trials.
BST 226
Statistical Methods for Bioinformatics
BST 131C or Consent of Instructor; Data analysis experience recommended.
Standard and advanced statistical methodology, theory, algorithms, and applications relevant to the analysis of -omics data.
BST 227
Machine Learning in Genomics
STA 208 or ECS 171;  or Consent of Instructor.
Emerging problems in molecular biology and current machine learning-based solutions to those problem. How deep learning, kernel methods, graphical models, feature selection, non-parametric models and other techniques can be applied to application areas such as gene editing, gene network inference and analysis, chromatin state inference, cancer genomics and single cell genomics. 
BST 252
Advanced Topics in Biostatistics
BST 222;  BST 223.
Biostatistical methods and models selected from the following:  genetics, bioinformatics and genomics;longitudinal or functional data; clinical trials and experimental design; analysis of environmental data; dose-response, nutrition and toxicology; survival analysis; observational studies and epidemiology; computer-intensive or Bayesian methods in biostatistics.
BST 299D
Dissertation Research
and Consent of Instructor.  Advancement to Candidacy for Ph.D.
Research in Biostatistics under the supervision of major professor.
CAR 192
Internship in Cardiology
Upper division standing; approval of project by preceptor prior to internship.
Supervised work experience in cardiology.  
CAR 199
Cardiology Research
Consent of Instructor.
Special study by individual arrangement in cardiovascular medicine. Work will include directed readings, laboratory and discussions.
CAR 220
Basic Science in Cardiology
Graduate or medical student status.
Fundamentals underlying cardiovascular medicine. Including hemodynamics, neural control of the circulation, biochemistry and some experimental design and statistics. Experts in each of these fields will give current information in their areas.
CAR 299
Cardiology Research
Consent of Instructor.
Research or special studies.
CAR 401
Clinical Cardiology Clerkship: Kaiser
Third- and fourth-year medical students with advance approval by Division of Cardiology.Limited enrollment.
Emphasis placed on history taking and physical examination of pediatric and adult patients with congenital and acquired cardiovascular disease. Hospital rounds in CCU and elsewhere. Roles of ECG, PCG, and cardiac fluoroscopy, etc., in office cardiology will be evaluated.
CAR 460
Cardiology Clinical Clerkship
IMD 430;  Third- and fourth-year medical students in good academic standing with consent of instructor.Limited enrollment.
Participation with members of subspecialty consultation service in initial clinical evaluation, work-up, management, and follow-up of patients with cardiologic disorders. Two outpatient clinics per week.
CAR 461
Management of Coronary Artery Disease: Coronary Care Unit
Completion of second-year of medical school and advance approval by Division of Cardiology.Limited enrollment.
Research in laboratory and exercise testing to be determined by instructor. Current methods of clinical research involving certain aspects of diagnosis and treatment. 
CAR 464
Preventive Cardiology
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of third-year medical school.
Clinical experience, weekly seminar and reading on primary and secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease. Will be carried out in Lipid and Hypertension Clinics, Exercise Laboratory, Cardiac Care Unit, Cardiac Catheterization, and Cardiac Surgery services.
CAR 480
Insights in Cardiology
Medical student in good academic standing and approval by Division of Cardiology.
Students attend one or more cardiovascular medicine clinics: general, hypertension, arrhythmia. Introduction to the diagnosis/treatment of common cardiovascular problems.
CAR 493
Gender Specific Medicine SSM
Consent of Instructor.UC Davis School of Medicine students only.
Special Studies Module, a four-week course on the topic Basic Science Principles Relating to Gender Specific Medicine.
CAR 498
Special Group Study: EKG Unit
Medical student with advance approval by monthly attending faculty.Limited enrollment.
Special group study in cardiology for medical students in EKG unit. May include lectures, directed reading, and/or discussion groups.
CAR 499
Research
Consent of Instructor.  Approval by Division of Cardiology.

CDM 020
Filmmaking Foundations
CDM 001 and/or CDM 003 recommended.
Introduction to filmmaking concepts, principles, and methods. Emphasis on form, content and historical dialectic between classical narrative filmmaking conventions and artists' challenges to these conventions. 
CDM 041A
History of Cinema from 1895-1945
CDM 001 recommended.
Examination of the cultural context of the emergence of cinema. Discussion of cinema as a product of the age of industrialization and conquest, as well as an element of urban culture, and mass transportation. 
CDM 092
Internship
Consent of Instructor.
Supervised internship, on or off campus, in the area of cinema and digital media. 
CDM 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study in cinema and digital media.
CDM 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.
Special study for undergraduates in cinema and digital media.
CDM 100
Experimental Digital Cinema I
CDM 020 or ART 012;  or Consent of Instructor.
Experimental approaches to the making of film and video in the age of digital technologies. Builds upon the foundation provided by CDM 020. Instruction in technical, conceptual, creative, and critical skills for taking a project from idea to fruition.
CDM 101
Experimental Digital Cinema II
CDM 100;  Consent of Instructor.
Continuation of CDM 100 with further exploration of digital cinema creation. Additional topics include new modes of distribution, streaming, installation and exhibition.
CDM 105
Feminist Media Production
(CTS 020 or CDM 020);  or two WMS courses.
Media production as a mode of cultural criticism, furthering feminist and social justice goals. Fundamentals of camera, editing and distribution via a social engagement model. Study and hands-on response to key historic and contemporary feminist and social justice media discourses.
CDM 111
Community Media Production
CDM 020 recommended.
Use of video and new media tools to address social issues among neighborhood and community groups. Use basic video, sound, and lighting techniques while working with local groups in a group video project. 
CDM 122
Intermediate Sonic Arts
CDM 121;  or Consent of Instructor.
Techniques of recording, editing, mixing, and synthesis to combine voice, field recordings, and electronic signals. Incorporating live, recorded, found sounds to create multidimensional stories. Presentation of live performances, etc.
CDM 125
Advanced Sound: Performance & Improvisation
CDM 121;  CDM 122;  or Consent of Instructor.
Culmination of CDM sound courses. Focuses on performance and improvisation, culminating in a final public performance. Expectation of extensive reading and rehearsal outside of class time.
CDM 131
Character Animation
CDM 130 or TCS 130.
The art of character animation in three dimensional computer animation. Movement theory, principles of animation, animation timing. Development of technical and practical skills.
CDM 135
Object-Oriented Programming for Artists
CDM 002 recommended.
Introduction to object-oriented programming for artists. Focus on understanding the metaphors and potential of object-oriented programming for sound, video, performance, and interactive installations.
CDM 137
Topics in Virtuality
CDM 002 recommended.
Social, political, economic, and aesthetic factors in virtual reality. Artificial environments, telepresence, and simulated experience. Focus on contemporary artists' work and writing.
CDM 189
Special Topics in Cinema & Digital Media
CDM 001 or CDM 002 recommended.
Special topics in cinema & digital media.
CDM 192
Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Supervised internship, on or off campus, in the area of cinema and digital media.
CDM 197T
Tutoring in Cinema & Digital Media
Consent of Instructor.  Consent of Department Chair.
Leading small voluntary discussion groups affiliated with departmental courses under the supervision of the course instructor.
CDM 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study in cinema and digital media. For students with upper division standing. May be taught abroad.
CDM 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.
Special study in cinema and digital media. For advanced undergraduates with upper division standing.
CDM 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Teaching assistant training practicum.
CGS 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study in cognitive science.
CGS 099
Special Study for Lower Division Students
Consent of Instructor.
Special study for lower division students.
CGS 107
Neuroeconomics/Reinforcement Learning & Decision Making
(PSC 100 or PSC 100Y or PSC 135 or ECN 100A or ARE 100A or NPB 162 or NPB 163);  (STA 013 or STA 013Y or STA 100 or PSC 103A);  or Consent of Instructor.
Theoretical and empirical approaches to neuroeconomics (neuroscience of decision making) from psychology, neuroscience, economics, and computer science. Neuroscience of judgment and decision making, behavioral economics, and reinforcement learning.
CGS 138
Consciousness & Cognition
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  PSC 041;  (PSC 100 or PSC 100Y or PSC 135).
Current theoretical and empirical evidence in the study of cognition and consciousness. Theories of consciousness, psychological and neural basis of conscious and unconscious processes such as attention, intentionality, and dreams.
CGS 192
Fieldwork in Cognitive Science
Consent of Instructor.
Supervised internship off and on campus, in community and institutional settings. 
CGS 194HA
Special Study for Honors Students
Consent of Instructor.  Senior standing in Cognitive Science; qualifications for admission into college honors program.
Directed research. Supervised reading, research and writing leading to submission of a Senior Honors thesis under the direction of faculty sponsor.
CGS 194HB
Special Study for Honors Students
Consent of Instructor.  Senior standing in Cognitive Science; qualifications for admission into college honors program.
Directed research. Supervised reading, research and writing leading to submission of a Senior Honors thesis under the direction of faculty sponsor.
CGS 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study in cognitive science.
CGS 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.
Special study for advanced undergraduates.
CHA 101
Human Gross Anatomy
BIS 002A;  Concurrent enrollment in EXB 106L or CHA 101L strongly recommended.Upper division students only; Pass One open to upper division Exercise Biology or Anthropology majors only; Pass Two open to Seniors in any major; open enrollment at the start of the quarter for upper division students in any major.
Detailed study of the gross anatomical structure of the human body, with emphasis on function and clinical relevance to students entering health care professions.
CHA 101L
Human Gross Anatomy Laboratory
BIS 002A;  (EXB 106 (can be concurrent) or CHA 101 (can be concurrent));  If EXB 106 or CHA 101 is not taken concurrently, it must have been already completed.Upper division students only; Pass One open to upper division Exercise Biology or Anthropology majors only; Pass Two open to Seniors in any major; open enrollment at the start of the quarter for upper division students in any major; mandatory attendance on first day of lab.
Detailed study of prosected human cadavers in small group format with extensive hands-on experience.
CHA 102
Human Microscopic Anatomy: Structure & Function of Human Tissues & Organ Systems 
BIS 104.Limited enrollment.
Complements Gross Anatomy by extending the study of structure to the microscopic level. Shows how cells are assembled into tissues, and tissues into organs, with an emphasis on demonstrating how microscopic structure explains function.
CHA 103
Human Clinical Neuroanatomy
CHA 101;  or Consent of Instructor.Open to upper division students.
Clinically relevant anatomy of the normal human nervous system, including external and internal anatomy of the brain, spinal cord, and cranial nerves. Blood supply to the brain and spinal cord. Functional neuroanatomy of motor, sensory, and cognitive systems. Application of neuroanatomical principles relevant to clinical problem solving for students entering health care professions.
CHA 192
Internship in Morphology
Upper division standing; laboratory science experience including some chemistry; approval of project by preceptor prior to period of internship.
Experience of supervised internship in research laboratories of members of the department.
CHA 197T
Tutoring in Cell Biology & Human Anatomy
CHA 101 B or better;  and Consent of Instructor.
Provides laboratory instruction in gross and microscopic human anatomy, with small groups of undergraduates under the supervision of the instructor.
CHA 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed reading, discussion, and/or laboratory experience on selected topics.
CHA 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

CHA 200
Graduate Human Gross Anatomy
Consent of Instructor.Open only to full-time graduate students.
Lectures on human gross anatomy and cadaver dissection laboratory. Topics arranged by region; emphasis on osteology, neuromuscular anatomy, cardiovascular anatomy, gastrointestinal anatomy and anatomy of reproductive systems.
CHA 203
Neurobiology
Consent of Instructor.  Two upper division or one graduate course in Neurobiology.
Physiology and anatomy of the normal human nervous system in an integrated format.  
CHA 290
Seminar
Consent of Instructor.

CHA 290C
Research Group Conference
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate student with research experience (may be taken concurrently).
Discussion of problems, progress and literature groups relevant to current research undertaken by laboratory groups Human Anatomy.
CHA 298
Advanced Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

CHA 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.

CHA 400
Developmental, Gross & Radiologic Anatomy
Consent of Instructor.Medical students only.
Integrated presentation of developmental, gross and radiologic anatomy. Embryology and radiology correlated with the dissection of the entire body. Embryology from implantation to birth.
CHA 402
Cell & Tissue Biology
Consent of Instructor.Medical student only.
Microscopic structure of the basic cells, tissues and organs of the body with an emphasis on how structure explains function. Analysis and identification of sectioned material at the light microscopic and ultrastructural levels.
CHA 403
Medical Neuroanatomy
CHA 400;  Block 1.Restricted to medical students only.
Anatomy of the normal human nervous system, to include gross external and internal morphology of brain and spinal cord, and function neuroanatomy of motor, sensory and cognitive systems. Incorporates application of neuroanatomy to clinical problem solving. 
CHA 493B
Anatomy Medical Education Special Study Module
Consent of Instructor.  UC Davis School of Medicine students only.
Attend all of the lectures and laboratory sessions for CHA 400 and CHA 402 during the four-week section; approximately seven anatomy labs and three-four histology labs. Tutor first-year students during the laboratory sessions. Prepare and present a clinical correlate session.
CHA 497T
Tutoring in Human Anatomy
Advanced standing or consent of instructor.
Assist instructor by tutoring medical students in preparation for one of the departmental courses that is a component of the required curriculum for the School of Medicine.
CHA 498
Advanced Group Study
Medical students, interns, and residents with consent of instructor.
Directed reading and group discussions and/or laboratory experience on selected topics.
CHA 499
Research
Consent of Instructor.

CHE 002A
General Chemistry
High school chemistry and physics, and concurrent enrollment in mathematics at or above the level of MAT 012 strongly recommended; any one of the following: (A) SAT Mathematics score = 600+; (B) ACT Mathematics score = 27+; (C) AP Chemistry exam score of = 3+; (D) SAT Chemistry subject test score = 700+; (E) UC Davis Chemistry Placement Examination score = 24+ on first attempt; in lieu of A-E, either completion of ALEKS online Preparatory Chemistry course with 100% Pie Mastery or completion of Workload 041C with a grade of C or better (Workload 041C offered in fall quarter only to students who do not meet A-E).
Periodic table, stoichiometry, chemical equations, physical properties and kinetic theory of gases, atomic and molecular structure and chemical bonding. Laboratory experiments in stoichiometric relations, properties and collection of gases, atomic spectroscopy, and introductory quantitative analysis. 
CHE 002AH
Honors General Chemistry
Consent of Instructor.  High school chemistry and physics. Any ONE of the following: (A) SAT Mathematics score = 670+; (B) ACT Mathematics score = 30+; (C) AP Chemistry exam score = 4+; (D) SAT Chemistry subject test score = 700+; (E) UC Davis Chemistry Placement Examination score = 33+ on first attempt; (F) UC Davis Chemistry Placement Examination score = 30+ AND UC Davis Mathematics Placement Examination score = 45+, both on first attempts; consent of instructor.
Limited enrollment course with a more rigorous treatment of material covered in CHE 002A. Students completing CHE 002AH can continue with CHE 002BH or CHE 002B.
CHE 002B
General Chemistry
CHE 002A C- or better or CHE 002AH C- or better.
Continuation of CHE 002A. Condensed phases and intermolecular forces, chemical thermodynamics, chemical equilibria, acids and bases, solubility. Laboratory experiments in thermochemistry, equilibria, and quantitative analysis using volumetric methods.
CHE 002BH
Honors General Chemistry
CHE 002A or CHE 002AH C or better;  MAT 021B (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.  CHE 2A with consent of instructor.
Limited enrollment course with a more rigorous treatment of material covered in CHE 002B. Students completing CHE 002BH can continue with CHE 002CH or CHE 002C.
CHE 002C
General Chemistry
CHE 002B C- or better or CHE 002BH C- or better.
Continuation of CHE 002B. Kinetics, electrochemistry, spectroscopy, structure and bonding in transition metal compounds, application of principles to chemical reactions. Laboratory experiments in selected analytical methods and syntheses.
CHE 002CH
Honors General Chemistry
CHE 002B or CHE 002BH C or better;  MAT 021C (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.  CHE 002B with consent of instructor.
Limited enrollment course with a more rigorous treatment of material covered in CHE 002C.
CHE 003A
Chemistry for Life Sciences: Determining Structure & Predicting Properties
High high school chemistry and physics strongly recommended; satisfactory score on the Chemistry and Mathematics Placement Examinations or satisfactory completion of the ALEKS Summer Chemistry Prep Course; a satisfactory grade in WKL 041C ('P' or 'C' or better) will suffice in lieu of a satisfactory Chemistry Placement Examination score.Concurrent enrollment with CHE 002A, CHE 002B, CHE 002C, CHE 002AH, CHE 002BH, CHE 002CH prohibited; not open for enrollment to students who have completed CHE 002C or 002CH with a C- or better.
Integrated General and Organic Chemistry intended for majors in the life sciences. Core concepts of chemical composition, structure and properties. Includes phase changes, separation methods, composition, spectroscopy, atomic and molecular structure, periodicity, bonding, charge distribution, intermolecular forces, and physical properties.
CHE 003B
Chemistry for Life Sciences: Predicting & Characterizing Chemical Change
CHE 003A C- or better;  Note: C- or better in CHE 002A or 002AH does not satisfy the prerequisite requirement.Concurrent enrollment with CHE 002A, CHE 002B, CHE 002C, CHE 002AH, CHE 002BH, CHE 002CH prohibited. 
Continuation of CHE 003A covering core concepts of characterization of chemical processes and predicting chemical changes. Includes modeling chemical reactions, understanding proportions/stoichiometry, tracking energy, activation energy, reaction kinetics, thermodynamics, and equilibrium.
CHE 003C
Chemistry for Life Sciences: Controlling Processes & Synthetic Pathways
CHE 003B C- or better;  Note: C- or better in CHE 002B or 002BH does not satisfy the prerequisite requirement.Concurrent enrollment with CHE 002A, CHE 002B, CHE 002C, CHE 002AH, CHE 002BH, CHE 002CH prohibited.
Continuation of CHE 003B covering core concepts of harnessing energy, controlling reaction extent, and organic chemistry synthetic pathways. Includes acids and bases, thermodynamics, chemical equilibria, organic chemistry terminology and mechanisms.
CHE 008A
Organic Chemistry: Brief Course
CHE 002B C- or better or CHE 002BH C- or better.
With CHE 008B, an introduction to the nomenclature, structure, chemistry, and reaction mechanisms of organic compounds. Intended for students majoring in areas other than organic chemistry.
CHE 008B
Organic Chemistry: Brief Course
CHE 008A or CHE 118A or CHE 128A.
Laboratory concerned primarily with organic laboratory techniques and the chemistry of the common classes of organic compounds. Lecture portion a continuation of CHE 008A.
CHE 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Primarily for lower division students.
CHE 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.
Special study for undergraduates.May be taught abroad.
CHE 100
Environmental Water Chemistry
CHE 002C or CHE 002CH.
Practical aspects of water chemistry in the environment, including thermodynamic relations, coordination chemistry, solubility calculations, redox reactions and rate laws. Computer modeling of the evolution in water chemistry from contact with minerals and gases.
CHE 103A
Chemistry for Life Sciences: Determining Organic Structures & Properties
CHE 002C C- or better or CHE 002CH C- or better;  (CHE 008A or CHE 118A or CHE 128A).Not open for enrollment to students who have completed CHE 008B, CHE 118B, CHE 118C, CHE 128B, CHE 128C with a C- or better.
Continuation of PHE 003C. Core concepts of organic structure, nomenclature, functional groups, organic acids and bases, resonance and delocalization, aromaticity, intermolecular forces, three-dimensional structure and conformational analysis, spectroscopy.
CHE 103B
Chemistry for Life Sciences: Predicting & Controlling Organic Pathways
CHE 103A C- or better.Not open for enrollment to students who have completed CHE 008B, CHE 118B, CHE 118C, CHE 128B, or CHE 128C with a C- or better.
Continuation of CHE 103A. Core concepts of functional group transformations, synthesis, mechanisms, sustainable chemistry, structure and function of biomolecules, organic reactions in biological systems, molecular design, detection, separation, and identification of organic molecules.
CHE 104
Forensic Applications of Analytical Chemistry
CHE 002C or CHE 002CH.
Theory and application of standard methods of chemical analysis to evidentiary samples. Use and evaluation of results from screening tests, FTIR, GC and GCMS to various sample types encountered in forensics.
CHE 105
Analytical & Physical Chemical Methods
CHE 110A (can be concurrent) or CHE 107B (can be concurrent).
Fundamental theory and laboratory techniques in; analytical and physical chemistry, errors and data analysis methods, basic electrical circuits in instruments, advanced solution equilibria, potentiometric analysis, chromatographic separations, UV-visible spectroscopy, lasers.
CHE 107A
Physical Chemistry for the Life Sciences
CHE 002C or CHE 002CH;  (MAT 016C or MAT 017C or MAT 021C);  (PHY 007C or PHY 009C or PHY 009HC).
Physical chemistry intended for majors in the life science area. Introductory development of classical and statistical thermodynamics including equilibrium processes and solutions of both non-electrolytes and electrolytes. The thermodynamic basis of electrochemistry and membrane potentials.
CHE 107B
Physical Chemistry for the Life Sciences
CHE 107A.
Continuation of CHE 107A. Kinetic theory of gases and transport processes in liquids. Chemical kinetics, enzyme kinetics and theories of reaction rates. Introduction to quantum theory, atomic and molecular structure, and spectroscopy. Application to problems in the biological sciences.
CHE 108
Molecular Biochemistry
CHE 128C or CHE 118C.Pass One open to Chemistry majors.
Chemical principles and experimental methods applied to the biological sciences to understand the molecular structure and function of proteins, nucleic acids, carbohydrates, and membrane lipids. 
CHE 110A
Physical Chemistry: Introduction to Quantum Mechanics
(PHY 007C or PHY 009C or PHY 009HC);  (CHE 002C or CHE 002CH);  (MAT 016C or MAT 017C or MAT 021C);  Completion of MAT 021D, MAT 022A, MAT 022AL; PHY 009C or PHY 009HC, strongly recommended.
Introduction to the postulates and general principles of quantum mechanics. Approximations based on variational method and time independent perturbation theory. Application to harmonic oscillator, rigid rotor, one-electron and many-electron atoms, and homo-and hetero-nuclear diatomic molecules.
CHE 110B
Physical Chemistry: Properties of Atoms & Molecules
CHE 110A.
Group theory. Application of quantum mechanics to polyatomic molecules and molecular spectroscopy. Intermolecular forces and the gas, liquid and solid states. Distributions, ensembles and partition functions. Transport properties.
CHE 110C
Physical Chemistry: Thermodynamics, Equilibria & Kinetics 
CHE 110B.
Development and application of the general principles of thermodynamics and statistical thermodynamics. Chemical kinetics, rate laws for chemical reactions and reaction mechanisms.
CHE 115
Instrumental Analysis
CHE 105;  (CHE 110B (can be concurrent) or (CHE 107A,  CHE 107B)).
Intermediate theory and laboratory techniques in analytical and physical chemistry. Advanced data analysis methods and goodness-of-fit criteria.  Fourier-transform spectroscopic methods and instrumentation. Mass spectrometry. Electrochemistry. Liquid chromatography.  
CHE 118A
Organic Chemistry for Health & Life Sciences
CHE 002C C- or better or CHE 002CH C- or better.
The 118A-C series is for students planning professional school studies in health and life sciences. Rigorous, in-depth presentation of basic principles with emphasis on stereochemistry and spectroscopy and preparations and reactions of nonaromatic hydrocarbons, haloalkanes, alcohols and ethers.
CHE 118B
Organic Chemistry for Health & Life Sciences
CHE 118A or CHE 128A.
Continuation of CHE 118A, with emphasis on spectroscopy and the preparation and reactions of aromatic hydrocarbons, organometallic compounds, aldehydes and ketones.
CHE 118C
Organic Chemistry for Health & Life Sciences
CHE 118B or (CHE 128B,  CHE 129A).Open to students changing from the CHE 128 course sequence only if they have completed prior organic laboratory work (at least course CHE 129A).
Continuation of CHE 118B, with emphasis on the preparation, reactions and identification of carboxylic acids and their derivatives, alkyl and acyl amines, -dicarbonyl compounds, and various classes of naturally occurring, biologically important compounds.
CHE 121
Introduction to Molecular Structure & Spectra
CHE 110B.
Modern theoretical and experimental methods used to study problems of molecular structure and bonding; emphasis on spectroscopic techniques.
CHE 122
Chemistry of Nanoparticles
CHE 110C (can be concurrent) or CHE 107B (can be concurrent).
Chemical and physical aspects of inorganic nanoparticles. Topics include synthesis, structure, colloidal behavior, catalytic activity, size and shape dependency of physical properties, analytical methods and applications. 
CHE 124A
Inorganic Chemistry: Fundamentals
CHE 002C or CHE 002CH.
Symmetry, molecular geometry and structure, molecular orbital theory of bonding (polyatomic molecules and transition metals), solid state chemistry, energetics and spectroscopy of inorganic compounds.
CHE 124B
Inorganic Chemistry: Main Group Elements
CHE 124A.
Synthesis, structure and reactivity of inorganic and heteroorganicmolecules containing the main group elements.
CHE 124C
Inorganic Chemistry: d & f Block Elements
CHE 124A.
Synthesis, structure and reactivity of transition metal complexes, organometallic and bioinorganic chemistry, the lanthanides and actinides.
CHE 124L
Laboratory Methods in Inorganic Chemistry
CHE 124B or CHE 124C (can be concurrent).
The preparation, purification and characterization of main group andtransition metal inorganic and organometallic compounds.
CHE 125
Advanced Methods in Physical Chemistry
CHE 110C (can be concurrent);  CHE 115.
Advanced theory and laboratory techniques in analytical and physical chemistry. Advanced spectroscopic methods. Thermodynamics. Kinetics.Chemical literature. Digital electronics and computer interfacing. Laboratory measurements and vacuum techniques.
CHE 128A
Organic Chemistry
CHE 002C C or better or CHE 002CH C or better.
Introduction to the basic concepts of organic chemistry with emphasis on stereochemistry and the chemistry of hydrocarbons. Designed primarily for majors in chemistry. Chemistry majors should enroll in CHE 129A concurrently. May be taught abroad.
CHE 128B
Organic Chemistry
CHE 128A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Continuation of CHE 128A with emphasis on the chemistry of alcohols, ethers, their sulfur analogs, and carbonyl compounds. Introduction to the application of spectroscopic methods to organic chemistry. Introduction to synthesis of moderately complex organic molecules. May be taught abroad.
CHE 128C
Organic Chemistry
CHE 128B.
Continuation of CHE 128B with emphasis on enolate condensations and the chemistry of amines, phenols, and sugars; selected biologically important compounds. May be taught abroad.
CHE 129A
Organic Chemistry Laboratory
(CHE 002C C or better or CHE 002CH C or better);  CHE 128A (can be concurrent).
Introduction to laboratory techniques of organic chemistry. Emphasis on methods used for separation and purification of organic compounds. May be taught abroad.
CHE 129B
Organic Chemistry Laboratory
CHE 129A;  CHE 128B (can be concurrent).
Continuation of CHE 129A. Emphasis on methods used for synthesis and isolation of organic compounds.
CHE 129C
Organic Chemistry Laboratory
CHE 128C (can be concurrent);  CHE 129B.
continuation of PHE 129B.
CHE 130A
Pharmaceutical Chemistry 
CHE 118C or CHE 128C.
Examination of the design principles and experimental methods used in pharmaceutical and medicinal chemistry. May be taught abroad.
CHE 130B
Pharmaceutical Chemistry 
CHE 130A (can be concurrent).
Continuation of CHE 130A with emphasis on case studies of various drugs and the use of computational methods in drug design. May be taught abroad.
CHE 130C
Case Studies in Pharmaceutical Chemistry
CHE 130A (can be concurrent);  CHE 130B (can be concurrent).
Seminar. Exploration of medicinal and pharmaceutical chemistry topics through seminars presented by professional chemists (and allied professionals). Designed to highlight career opportunities for students with a degree in pharmaceutical chemistry. 
CHE 131
Modern Methods of Organic Synthesis
CHE 128C or CHE 118C.
Introduction to modern synthetic methodology in organic chemistry with emphasis on retrosynthetic analysis, reaction mechanisms, and application to multistep syntheses of pharmaceuticals and natural products.
CHE 135
Advanced Bio-organic Chemistry Laboratory
CHE 130B (can be concurrent).
Separation, purification, identification and biological evaluation of organic compounds using modern methods of synthesis, computational chemistry and instrumentation. Emphasis on pharmaceutical and medicinal substances.
CHE 145
Good Quality Practices 
CHE 118B or CHE 129B.Open to Chemistry and science majors.
Preparation for work in GQP laboratories in both research and industry.  Context within GQP-Good Quality Practices (GMP Good Manufacturing Practice, GCP Good Clinical Practices). Lab practice in GQP skills.
CHE 150
Chemistry of Natural Products
CHE 118C or CHE 128C.
Chemistry of terpenes, steroids, acetogenins, and alkaloids: isolation, structure determination, biosynthesis, chemical transformations, and total synthesis. May be taught abroad.
CHE 155
Scientific Programming for Chemistry
ECS 010 or ECS 032A;  or equivalent; or Consent of Instructor.
Chemical applications of computer programming with Python. Numpy, Scipy, Matplotlib libraries. Multidimensional arrays, data visualization, linear algebra routines. Force fields and molecular dynamics simulations. Numerical integration of differential equations with applications to chemical kinetics. Least squares fitting of experimental data. 
CHE 192
Internship in Chemistry
Upper division standing; project approval by faculty sponsor prior to enrollment.
Supervised internship in chemistry; requires a final written report.
CHE 194HA
Undergraduate Honors Research
Open only to chemistry majors who have completed 135 units and who qualify for the honors program.
Original research under the guidance of a faculty advisor, culminating in the writing of an extensive report.
CHE 194HB
Undergraduate Honors Research
Open only to chemistry majors who have completed 135 units and who qualify for the honors program.
Original research under the guidance of a faculty advisor, culminating in the writing of an extensive report.
CHE 194HC
Undergraduate Honors Research
Open only to chemistry majors who have completed 135 units and who qualify for the honors program.
Original research under the guidance of a faculty advisor, culminating in the writing of an extensive report.
CHE 195
Careers in Chemistry
Junior or senior standing in Chemistry.
Designed to give Chemistry undergraduate students an in-depth appreciation of career opportunities with a bachelors degree in chemistry. Professional chemists (and allied professionals) describe research and provide career insights.
CHE 197
Projects in Chemical Education
Consent of Instructor.
Participation may include development of laboratory experiments, lecture demonstrations, autotutorial modules or assistance with laboratory sessions.
CHE 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of instructor based upon adequate preparation in chemistry, mathematics and physics.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.
CHE 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of instructor based upon adequate preparation in chemistry, mathematics, and physics.
Special study for advanced undergraduates. May be taught abroad.
CHE 201
Chemical Uses of Symmetry & Group Theory
CHE 124A;  CHE 110B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Symmetry elements and operations, point groups, representations of groups. Applications to molecular orbital theory, ligand field theory, molecular vibrations, and angular momentum. Crystallographic symmetry.
CHE 204
Mathematical Methods in Chemistry
CHE 110C.Graduate standing in Chemistry.
Introduction to mathematical and numerical methods in chemistry. Real and complex functions.  Methods of integration. Differential equations. Linear algebra and matrices. Special functions. Integral transforms. Statistics.
CHE 205
Symmetry, Spectroscopy, & Structure
CHE 201;  Or equivalent.
Vibrational and rotational spectra; electronic spectra and photoelectron spectroscopy; magnetism; electron spin and nuclear quadrapole resonance spectroscopy; nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy; other spectroscopic methods.
CHE 209
Special Topics in Physical Chemistry
CHE 210A;  CHE 211A.Graduate standing in Chemistry.
Advanced topics in physical chemistry, biophysical chemistry or chemical physics chosen from areas of current research interest.  
CHE 210A
Quantum Chemistry: Introduction & Stationary-State Properties
CHE 110B;  CHE 110C;  or Consent of Instructor.
Stationary-state quantum chemistry: postulates of quantum mechanics, simple solutions, central field problems and angular momenta, hydrogen atom, perturbation theory, variational theory, atoms and molecules.
CHE 210B
Quantum Chemistry: Time-Dependent Systems
CHE 210A.
Matrix mechanics and time-dependent quantum chemistry: matrix formulation of quantum mechanics, Heisenberg representation, time-dependent perturbation theory, selection rules, density matrices, and miscellaneous molecular properties.
CHE 210C
Quantum Chemistry: Molecular Spectroscopy
CHE 210B.
Molecular spectroscopy: Born-Oppenheimer approximation, rotational, vibrational and electronic spectroscopy, spin systems, and molecular photophysics.
CHE 211A
Advanced Physical Chemistry: Statistical Thermodynamics
Consent of Instructor.
Principles and applications of statistical mechanics; ensemble theory; statistical thermodynamics of gases, solids, liquids, electrolyte solutions and polymers; chemical equilibrium.
CHE 211B
Statistical Mechanics
CHE 211A.
Statistical mechanics of nonequilibrium systems, including the rigorous kinetic theory of gases, continuum mechanics transport in dense fluids, stochastic processes, brownian motion and linear response theory.
CHE 212
Chemical Dynamics
Consent of Instructor.
Introduction to modern concepts in chemical reaction dynamics for graduate students in chemistry. Emphasis will be placed on experimental techniques as well as emerging physical models for characterizing chemical reactivity at a microscopic level.
CHE 215
Theoretical & Computational Chemistry
CHE 211A;  CHE 210B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Mathematics of wide utility in chemistry, computational methods for guidance or alternative to experiment, and modern formulations of chemical theory. Emphasis will vary in successive years.
CHE 216
Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy
CHE 210A;  CHE 210B (can be concurrent).
Quantum mechanics of spin and orbital angular momentum, nuclear magnetic resonance, theory of chemical shift and multiplet structures, electron spin resonance, theory of gtensor in organic and transition ions, spin Hamiltonians, nuclear quadrupolar resonance, spin relaxation processes.
CHE 217
X-Ray Structure Determination
Consent of Instructor.
Introduction to x-ray structure determination; crystals, symmetry, diffraction geometry, sample preparation and handling, diffraction apparatus and data collection, methods of structure solution and refinement, presentation of results, text, tables and graphics,crystallographic literature.
CHE 218
Macromolecules: Physical Principles
CHE 110A;  CHE 110B;  CHE 110C;  Or equivalent.
Relationship of higher order macromolecular structure to subunit composition; equilibrium properties and macromolecular dynamics; physical chemical determination of macromolecular structure.
CHE 219
Spectroscopy of Organic Compounds
CHE 128C;  Or equivalent.
Identification of organic compounds and investigation of stereochemical and reaction mechanism phenomena using spectroscopic methods--principally NMR, IR and MS.
CHE 219L
Laboratory in Spectroscopy of Organic Compounds
CHE 219 (can be concurrent).Restricted to Chemistry graduate students only or consent of instructor
Practical application of NMR, IR and MS techniques for organic molecules.
CHE 222
Chemistry of Nanoparticles
CHE 110C;  Or equivalent.
Chemical and physical aspects of inorganic nanoparticles, including synthesis, purification, reactivity, characterization, and applications for technology. Emphasis is on problems from the current literature. 	
CHE 226
Principles of Transition Metal Chemistry
CHE 124A;  or equivalent.
Electronic structures, bonding, and reactivity of transition metal compounds.
CHE 228A
Bio-inorganic Chemistry
CHE 226;  or Consent of Instructor.
Defines role of inorganic chemistry in the functioning of biological systems by identifying the functions of metal ions and main group compounds in biological systems and discussing the chemistry of model and isolated biological compounds. Offered every third year. 
CHE 228B
Main Group Chemistry
CHE 226;  or Consent of Instructor.
Synthesis, physical properties, reactions and bonding of main group compounds. Discussions of concepts of electron deficiency, hypervalency,and non-classical bonding. Chemistry of the main group elements will be treated systematically. Offered every third year. 
CHE 228C
Solid-State Chemistry
CHE 124A;  CHE 110B;  CHE 226;  Or equivalent.
Design and synthesis, structure and bonding of solid-state compounds; physical properties and characterization of solids; topics of current interest such as low-dimensional materials, inorganic polymers, materials for catalysis. Offered every third year. 
CHE 228D
Homogeneous Catalysis
CHE 226.
Overview of homogeneous catalysis and related methods, with emphasis on kinetics, mechanisms, and applications for organic synthesis.  The related methods may include cluster, colloid, phase transfer, enzymatic, heterogeneous and polymer-supported catalysis. Offered every third year. 
CHE 228E
Magnetochemistry
CHE 124A or CHE 201;  Or an equivalent class from either Physics or Chemical Engineering and Materials Science.
Covers the basic principles and concepts of magnetism, methods used for characterization of magnetic properties, as well as specific state-of-the-art magnetic materials and topics from the recent chemistry literature.
CHE 231A
Organic Synthesis: Methods & Strategies
CHE 128C;  Or equivalent.
Current strategies and methods in synthetic organic chemistry. Focus on construction of carbon frameworks, control of relative and absolute stereochemistry and retrosynthetic strategies. Use of databases and molecular modeling software in multistep strategies.  
CHE 231B
Advanced Organic Synthesis
CHE 231A.
Current strategies and methods in synthetic organic chemistry. Continuation of CHE 231A. Organic synthesis of complex target molecules. Stereochemical considerations and asymmetric synthesis. Organometallics for selective transformations. Carbocyclic and heterocyclic ring formation.
CHE 233
Physical-Organic Chemistry
CHE 128A;  CHE 128B;  CHE 128C;  CHE 110A;  CHE 110B;  CHE 110C;  Or equivalent.
Introduction to elementary concepts in physicalorganic chemistry including the application of simple numerical techniques in characterizing and modeling organic reactions.
CHE 235
Organometallic Chemistry in Organic Synthesis
CHE 128C.
Current trends in use of organometallics for organic synthesis; preparations, properties, applications, and limitations of organometallic reagents derived from transition and/or main group metals.
CHE 236
Chemistry of Natural Products
CHE 128C;  Or equivalent.
Advanced treatment of chemistry of naturally occurring compounds isolated from a variety of sources. Topics will include isolation, structure determination, chemical transformations, total synthesis,biological activity, and biosynthesis. Biosynthetic origin will be used as a unifying theme.
CHE 237
Bio-organic Chemistry
CHE 128C;  Or equivalent.
Structure and function of biomolecules; molecular recognition; enzyme reaction mechanisms; design of suicide substrates for enzymes; enzyme engineering; design of artificial enzymes and application of enzymes in organic synthesis.
CHE 238
Introduction to Chemical Biology
CHE 118C or CHE 128C;  Or equivalent; CHE 130A, CHE 130B and BIS 102, BIS 103, and BIS 104, or the equivalents recommended.
Synthesis of complex molecules in nature. Use of biosynthetic pathways in synthesis of new chemical entities. Applications of small molecules in chemical genetics and structural biology. Solving biological problems using synthetic biomolecules.
CHE 240
Advanced Analytical Chemistry
CHE 110A;  CHE 115;  Or equivalent.
Numerical treatment of experimental data; thermodynamics of electrolyte and non-electrolyte solutions; complex equilibria in aqueous and non-aqueous solutions; potentiometry and specific ion electrodes; mass transfer in liquid solutions; fundamentals of separation science, including column, gas and liquid chromatography.
CHE 241A
Surface Analytical Chemistry
CHE 110C;  Or equivalent.
Concepts of surfaces and interfaces: physical properties, unique chemistry and electronic effects.  Focus on gas-solid interfaces, with some discussion of liquid-solid interfaces.
CHE 241B
Laser & X-ray Spectroscopy
CHE 110B;  Or equivalent.
Concepts and mechanisms of light-matter interactions. Chemical applications of modern spectroscopic methods, including multiphoton spectroscopy, time-resolved laser and x-ray photolysis, and phase-contrast x-ray imaging.
CHE 241C
Mass Spectrometry
CHE 110C;  CHE 115;  Or equivalent.
Mass spectrometry and related methods with emphasis on ionization methods, mass analyzers, and detectors.  Related methods may include ion-molecule reactions, unimolecular dissociation of organic and bio-organic compounds, and applications in biological and environmental analysis. 
CHE 241D
Electroanalytical Chemistry
CHE 110C;  CHE 115;  Or equivalent.
Electroanalytical chemistry with consideration of mass transfer and electrode kinetics for polarizable electrodes.  Current-potential curves for a variety of conditions, including both potentiostatic and galvanostatic control, and their application in chemical analysis.
CHE 241E
 Microscopy & Imaging Techniques
CHE 110C;  CHE 115;  Or equivalent.
Introduction to modern microscopy and imaging techniques: scanning tunneling, atomic force, far-field optical, fluorescence, scanning near-field optical, and scanning electron microscopy. Application to nanoscience and analytical and bioanalytical chemistry. Some laboratory demonstrations.
CHE 261
Current Topics in Chemical Research
Graduate standing in Chemistry or consent of instructor.
Designed to help chemistry graduate students develop and maintain familiarity with the current and past literature in their immediate field of research and related areas.
CHE 263
Introduction to Chemical Research Methodology
CHE 293;  and Consent of Instructor.  Graduate student standing in Chemistry.
Introduction to identification, formulation, and solution of meaningfulscientific problems including experimental design and/or theoretical analyses of new and prevailing techniques, theories and hypotheses. May be repeated for credit when topic differs.
CHE 264
Advanced Chemical Research Methodology
CHE 263;  or Consent of Instructor.
Applications of the methodology developed in CHE 263 to experimental and theoretical studies. Advanced methods of interpretation of results are developed. Includes the preparation of manuscripts for publication.
CHE 290
Seminar
Consent of Instructor.

CHE 294
Presentation of Chemistry Research
Graduate standing.Restricted to graduate students in Chemistry who have not yet given their departmental presentation.
Introduces first- and second-year Chemistry graduate students to the process of giving an effective research presentation. Advanced Ph.D. students give formal seminars describing the design and execution of their research projects.
CHE 295
Careers in Chemistry
Graduate standing in Chemistry.
Designed to give Chemistry graduate students an in-depth appreciation of career opportunities with a M.S. or Ph.D. degree in chemistry.  Professional chemists (and allied professionals) give seminars describing both research and career insights.
CHE 296
Research in Pharmaceutical Chemistry
CHE 130A;  CHE 130B;  CHE 135;  CHE 233 (can be concurrent);  and Consent of Instructor.Restricted to students in the Integrated B.S./M.S. Program in Chemistry.
Laboratory provides qualified graduate students with the opportunity to pursue original investigation in Pharmaceutical Chemistry and allied fields in order to fulfill the letter-graded research requirement of the Integrated B.S./M.S. Program in Chemistry (Pharmaceutical Chemistry Emphasis).
CHE 390
Methods of Teaching Chemistry
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate student standing in Chemistry.
Practical experience in methods and problems of teaching chemistry. Includes analyses of texts and supporting material, discussion of teaching techniques, preparing for and conducting of discussion sessions and student laboratories. Participation in the teaching program required for Ph.D. in chemistry.
CHE 392
Advanced Methods of Teaching Chemistry
CHE 390.
Advanced topics in teaching chemistry. Analysis and discussion of curricular design, curricula materials, teaching methods and evaluation. For students who are planning a career in teaching chemistry.
CHI 021
Chicana/o & Latina/o Health Care Issues
CHI 010.
Overview of health issues of Chicanas/os and Latinas/os in the State of California; role of poverty/lack of education in limited access to health care.
CHI 021S
Chicana/o & Latina/o Health Care Issues
SPA 003 or SPA 003V or SPA 003Y;  Or equivalent.
Overview of health issues of Chicanas/os and Latinas/os in the State of California; role of poverty/lack of education and limited access to health care. All course instruction in Spanish. May be taught abroad.
CHI 040
Comparative Health: Top Leading Causes of Death
STA 013 or STA 013Y;  or Consent of Instructor.
Introduction to the epidemiology of the leading causes of death for ethnic/racial minorities. Assessment of disproportionate rates at which ethnic/racial minorities suffer and die from chronic and infectious diseases and injuries and statistical methods used to calculate these rates.
CHI 040S
Comparative Health: Leading Causes of Death
STA 013 or STA 013Y;  or Consent of Instructor.
Introduction to epidemiology of leading causes of death for ethnic/racial minorities. Assessment of disproportionate rates at which ethnic/racial minorities suffer & die from chronic and infectious diseases & injuries & statistical methods used to calculate these rates. May be taught abroad.
CHI 092
Internship
CHI 010;  or Consent of Instructor.
Academic guidance combined with internship in community agencies serving Mexican/Latina/Latino/Chicana/Chicano clients. Students will use their bilingual skills and knowledge of history, culture, economics, politics and social issues. 
CHI 100
Chicana/ Chicano Theoretical Perspective
CHI 010;  CHI 050.
Critical examination of emerging Chicana/o Studies theoretical perspectives in light of contemporary intellectual frameworks in the social sciences, arts, and humanities. Includes analysis of practices of self-representation, and socio-cultural developments in the Chicana/o community.
CHI 110
Sociology of the Chicana/o Experience
CHI 010 or SOC 001.
The Chicana/o experience in the American society and economy viewed from theoretical perspectives. Immigration, history of integration of Chicana/o labor into American class structure, education inequality, ethnicity, the family and Chicana/o politics. (Former course SOC 110.)
CHI 111
Chicanas/Mexicanas in Contemporary Society
CHI 010 or CHI 050;  (WMS 050 or HIS 169B).
Analysis of the role and status of Chicanas/Mexicanas in contemporary society. Special emphasis on their historical role, the political, economic and social institutions that have affected their status, and their contributions to society and their community. (Former CHI 102.)
CHI 112
Globalization, Transnational Migration, & Chicana/o & Latina/o Communities
CHI 010.
Chicana/o and Latina/o migration experiences within a global context. Topics include national and/or transnational migration in Mexico, Central America, and the United States.
CHI 120
Chicana/ o Psychology
CHI 021;  Introductory psychology course recommended.
Introduction to the field of Chicana/o psychology. Analysis of socio-cultural context of Chicanas/os and Latinas/os. Special attention to issues of ethnic identity development, bilingualism, and development of self esteem. Impact of minority experience, migration, acculturation are examined.
CHI 121
Chicana/ o Community Mental Health 
CHI 010;  or CHI 020.
Mental health needs, problems, and service utilization patterns of Chicanas/os and Latinas/os will be analyzed. An analysis of social service policy, and the economic context of mental health programs.
CHI 122
Psychology Perspectives Chicana/o & Latina/o Family
CHI 010;  and Consent of Instructor.  Introductory psychology course highly recommended.
Role of migration and acculturation on family structure and functioning. From a psychological and Chicana/o Studies perspective, contemporary gender roles and variations in family structures are examined. Special topics include family violence, addiction, family resilience and coping strategies.
CHI 123
Psychological perspectives on Chicana/o & Latina/o Children & Adolescents
CHI 010 or CHI 021.Restricted to upper division standing.
Psychological and educational development of Chicano/Latino children and adolescents, with particular attention to the formation of ethnic, gender, class, race, and sexual identities.  
CHI 125S
Latino Families in the Age of Globalization: Migration & Transculturation
SPA 003 or the equivalent highly recommended.
Impact of globalization on Latino families in the American continent. Relationships of political structure, economics and family. Intimate partner violence, child maltreatment and alcohol/drug abuse in contemporary Latino families. Offered in a Spanish speaking country; may be taught abroad.
CHI 130
United States-Mexican Border Relations 
Upper division standing.
Theories of U.S.-Mexican border relations, with an overview of the political, economic, and social relationships and an in-depthanalysis of immigration issues, border industrialization, women's organizations, economic crises, and legal issues.
CHI 131
Chicanas in Politics & Public Policy 
CHI 030 or POL 001.
Historical and political analysis of Chicana/Latina political involvement and activities in the general political system, women's movement, Chicano movement, and Chicana movement. Examines the public policy process and the relationship of Chicanas/Latinas to public policy formation.
CHI 132
Political Economy of Chicana/o Communities
Upper division standing; lower division Chicana/o Studies (CHI) course recommended.
Historical and contemporary study of political and economic forces which define and influence the development of Chicana/o communities. Includes critiques of traditional and Marxian theories and concepts applicable to Chicana/o communities, case studies of Chicana/o communities,especially in California and Texas.
CHI 135S
Transnational Latina/o Political Economy
SPA 003 or SPA 003V or SPA 003Y;  or Consent of Instructor.  Or equivalent; ECN 001A and ECN 001B recommended.
Intensive reading, discussion and research on selected topics from Latin America and the U.S. with regard to immigrant and native communities. Topics include comparative immigration and macroeconomic policies in the U.S. and Latin America. Offered in a Spanish speaking country; may be taught abroad.
CHI 140A
Quantitative Methods: Chicano/Latino Health Research
Two years of high school algebra or the equivalent in college.
Focuses on measuring Latino/Chicano health outcomes using a quantitative approach. Assesses main types of study designs and addresses measurement of disease frequency and health effects.
CHI 145S
Bi-National Health
BIS 001A;  BIS 001B;  BIS 001C;  (SPA 021 or SPA 021V or SPA 021Y or SPA 031);  or Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing only.
Examination of  health status and intervention strategies presented in public health care settings, private clinics and by indigenous healers in Mexico. Analysis of impact of high risk diseases. Offered in a Spanish speaking country under supervision of UC Davis faculty/lecturer; may be taught abroad.
CHI 154
The Chicana/o Novel
Intermediate Spanish or consent of instructor.
Introduction to the forms and themes of the Chicana/o novel with special attention to the construction of gender, nationality, sexuality, social class, and the family by contemporary Chicana/o novelists. Bilingual readings, lectures, discussions, and writing in Spanish.(Former course SPA 126A.)
CHI 155
Chicana/o Theater
Intermediate Spanish or consent of instructor.
Examination of the formal and thematic dimensions of Chicana/o theater in the contemporary period with special emphasis on El Teatro Campesino and Chicana Feminist Theater. Bilingual readings, lectures, discussions, and writing in Spanish. (Former course SPA 126B.)
CHI 156
Chicana/o Poetry
Intermediate Spanish or consent of instructor.
Survey of Chicana/o poetry with special emphasis on its thematic and formal dimensions. Bilingual readings, lectures, discussions, and writing in Spanish. (Former course SPA 126C.)
CHI 160
Mexican Film & Greater Mexican Identity
Intermediate Spanish.
Survey of the role Mexican cinema plays in consolidation and contestation of post-revoluationary Mexican state and in the formation of a Greater Mexican cultural identity including Chicana/o identity. Showcases genres, perios, auteurs, movements and emphasis on gendered and sexualized narratives.
CHI 165
Chicanas, Latinas & Mexicanas in Commercial Media
CHI 060;  Or other film or feminist theory course; conversational fluency in Spanish.
The portrayal of Chicanas, Latinas and Mexicanas in commercial media. The relation between the representation of Chicana, Latina, and Mexicana women in commercial television and cinema and the role of women in Mexican and U.S. societies.
CHI 171
Mexican & Chicano Mural Workshop
CHI 070;  and Consent of Instructor.
The Mural: a collective art process that empowers students and people through design and execution of mural paintings in the tradition of the Mexican Mural Movement; introduces materials and techniques.
CHI 172
Chicana/o Voice/Poster Silk Screen Workshop
CHI 070 or CHI 073;  and Consent of Instructor.
The poster as a voice art form used by Chicanas/os and other people of color to point to the defects of social and political existence and the possibility for change, from the Chicana/o artists' perspective.
CHI 180
Grant Writing in the Chicana/o/Latina/o Community
CHI 010 or CHI 023;  or Consent of Instructor.Upper division standing.
Overview of key elements for grant writing. Topics include community needs assessments, development of human subjects protocols, data collection, methods, evaluation designs and community based methodologies for grant development applications in the Latino community.
CHI 181
Chicanas & Latinas in the U.S.: Historical Perspectives
CHI 010 or WMS 050.
Historical issues in the lives of Chicanas and Latinas in the U.S. and their diverse countries of origin.
CHI 182
Race & Juvenile Justice
CHI 010;  Or equivalent.
Individual and institutinal respnses to "troublesome" youth of color through history and in contemporary siciety. Emphasis on how race, as well as ethnicity, class, and gender have informed the treatment of "delinquent" youth.
CHI 192
Internship in the Chicana/Chicano/Latina/Latino Community
(CHI 010 or CHI 021 or CHI 050);  (SPA 003 or SPA 003V);  Or equivalent of SPA 003.
Academic guidance combined with internship in community agencies serving Mexican/Latina/Latino/Chicana/Chicano clients. Use of bilingual skills and knowledge of history, culture, economics, politics and social issues. Internship project required. 
CHI 192S
Internship
(CHI 010 or CHI 021 or CHI 050);  (SPA 003 or SPA 003V or SPA 003Y);  and Consent of Instructor.  Or equivalent of SPA 003, SPA 003V, SPA 003Y.
Internship. May be taught abroad.
CHI 194HA
Senior Honors Research Project
Consent of Instructor.  Senior standing in Chicana/o Studies major.
Student is required to read, research, and write Honors Thesis on Chicana/o Studies topics.
CHI 194HB
Senior Honors Research Project
Consent of Instructor.  Senior standing in Chicana/o Studies major.
Student is required to read, research, and write Honors Thesis on Chicana/o Studies topics. 
CHI 194HC
Senior Honors Research Project
Consent of Instructor.  Senior standing in Chicana/o Studies major.
Student is required to read, research, and write Honors Thesis on Chicana/o Studies topics.
CHI 198
Directed Group Study
Upper division standing and consent of Program Chairperson.

CHI 198S
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.
CHI 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Upper division standing and consent of Program Chairperson.

CHI 199S
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.
Special study for advanced undergraduates. May be taught abroad.
CHI 230
Chicano/Latino Hispanic Politics
Two undergraduate courses in Chicana/o Studies (CHI) or consent of instructor.
Examination of Chicano/Latino political experiences. Evaluate theories, ideology, and practice of Chicano politics. Brief history of Chicano/Latino/Hispanic political activity, comparisons among political modes, gendered politics, and understanding relationships among Chicano, Mexican, American and world politics.
CHI 298
Group Study for Graduate Students
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

CHI 299
Special Study for Graduate Students
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

CHI 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

CHN 001
Elementary Chinese
No background in Chinese or placement exam or consent of instructor.
Developing elementary level skills of listening, speaking, reading and writing in Mandarin Chinese in everyday communication settings. Introduction of fundamentals of pronunciation, grammar, and Chinese characters will be introduced.
CHN 001A
Accelerated Intensive Elementary Chinese
No background in Chinese or placement exam or consent of instructor.
Introduction and practice in contexts of pronunciation, writing system, basic grammar and vocabulary as basis of communicative competency in Mandarin Chinese within a special nine-week intensive course which combines CHN 001, CHN 002 and CHN 003.
CHN 001BL
Accelerated Written Chinese I
Placement exam or consent of instructor.
Trainings on all the communicative skills of listening, speaking, reading, and writing for students who already have elementary level ability to understand or speak Mandarin Chinese. Emphases on standard Mandarin pronunciation, Chinese characters, and discourse level conversations.
CHN 001CN
Mandarin for Cantonese Speakers I
Placement exam or consent of instructor.
Training in spoken Mandarin, particularly in the phonetic transcription system known as pinyin, for students who already read and write Chinese. 
CHN 002
Elementary Chinese
CHN 001;  Or placement exam or consent of instructor.
Continuation of elementary level skill development in listening, speaking, reading and writing Mandarin Chinese in everyday communication settings.  Continued introduction of basic vocabulary and characters as well as core grammar, and further train pronunciation.
CHN 002BL
Accelerated Written Chinese II
CHN 001BL;  Or placement exam or consent of instructor.
Further trainings on all the communicative skills of listening, speaking, reading, and writing for students that already have elementary level ability to understand or speak Mandarin Chinese. Emphases on standard Mandarin pronunciation, Chinese characters, and discourse level conversations.
CHN 002CN
Mandarin for Cantonese Speakers II
CHN 001CN;  Or placement exam or consent of instructor.
Continuation of CHN 001CN. Training in spoken Mandarin for students who can already read and write Chinese. 
CHN 003
Elementary Chinese
CHN 002;  Or placement exam or consent of instructor.
Continuation of elementary level skill development in listening, speaking, reading and writing Mandarin Chinese in everyday communication settings.  Continued introduction of basic vocabulary and characters as well as core grammar, and further train pronunciation.
CHN 003BL
Accelerated Written Chinese III
CHN 002BL;  Or placement exam or consent of instructor.
Continuation of CHN 002BL with further trainings on all the communicative skills of listening, speaking, reading, and writing with emphases on standard Mandarin pronunciation, Chinese characters, and discourse level conversations in more communication settings.
CHN 003CN
Mandarin for Cantonese Speakers III
CHN 002CN;  Or placement exam or consent of instructor.
Continuation of CHN 002CN. Prepares students for entering upper division courses in Chinese.
CHN 004
Intermediate Chinese
CHN 003 or placement exam or consent of instructor.
Continuation of intermediate-level communication skills in spoken and written Mandarin, based on language skills developed in CHN 003.
CHN 004A
Accelerated Intensive Intermediate Chinese
CHN 003 or CHN 001A or placement exam or consent of instructor.
Special nine-week accelerated, intensive summer session course that combines the work of CHN 004, CHN 005, and CHN 006. Intermediate-level training in spoken and written Chinese in cultural and communicative contexts, based on language skills developed in CHN 003 or CHN 001A.
CHN 005
Intermediate Chinese
CHN 004 or placement exam or consent of instructor.
Training continues at intermediate-level in spoken and written Chinese in cultural contexts, based on language skills developed in CHN 004.
CHN 006
Intermediate Chinese
CHN 005;  CHN 005 or placement exam or consent of instructor.
Intermediate-level training in spoken and written Chinese in cultural contexts, based on language skills developed in CHN 005.
CHN 007
Chinese Business Culture
Consent of Instructor.Open to non-heritage students who have no prior knowledge of, or background in, the Chinese language; anyone who has taken Chinese language classes before or after being enrolled at UC Davis, or anyone who is currently enrolled in a Chinese language class, or who speaks any Mandarin or Chinese dialect (e.g., Cantonese), cannot take the course for credit without the instructors permission.
Introduction to business culture of China. Basic conversation and Romanization of Chinese words.
CHN 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

CHN 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

CHN 100A
Chinese Intellectual Traditions: Daoist Traditions
A course in Chinese history recommended.
English-language survey of key Daoist texts and scholarship. Topics include Daoist concepts of the cosmos, the natural world, scripture, the body, and immortality; Daoist divinities; Daoism and the state.
CHN 111
Modern Chinese: Reading & Discussion 
CHN 006 C- or better or CHN 003BL C- or better or CHN 004A C- or better;  Or placement exam or consent of instructor.
Building on Chinese 006/003BL, further development of communication skills in Modern Standard Mandarin-speaking environments. Reading of dialogues/articles pertaining to contemporary China.
CHN 111A
Intensive Third-Year Chinese
CHN 006 or CHN 003BL or CHN 004A;  Or placement exam or consent of instructor.Not open to students who have completed CHN 111, CHN 112, or CHN 113. 
Nine-week intensive summer course combines CHN 111, CHN 112, and CHN 113. Training at intermediate-high and advanced-low level in spoken and written Chinese in cultural and communicative contexts based on language skills developed in CHN 006. 
CHN 112
Modern Chinese: Reading & Discussion
CHN 111;  Or placement exam or consent of instructor.
Further development of communication skills from CHN 111 in Modern Standard Mandarin-speaking environments. Reading dialogues/articles pertaining to contemporary China issues and discussing ethical, moral, aesthetic, social, and cultural concerns.
CHN 113
Modern Chinese: Reading & Discussion
CHN 112;  Or placement exam or consent of instructor.
Continuation of CHN 112, further developing communication skills in Modern Standard Mandarin-speaking environments. Read dialogues/articles pertaining to contemporary China issues and discuss ethical, moral, aesthetic, social, and cultural concerns. Study strategies for moving between simplified and traditional Chinese characters.
CHN 114
Introduction to Classical Chinese
CHN 112;  Consent of Instructor.  Or equivalent language proficiency.
Introduction to the language in which, until the 20th century, most official, documentary, scholarly, and belle-lettristic Chinese literature was written.  
CHN 115
Introduction to Classical Chinese II
CHN 114;  or Consent of Instructor.
Continuation of enhancing classical Chinese reading skills with literature ranging from the prose found in Han dynasty historical works, Six Dynasties anecdotal literature, and Tang occasional texts, as well as the poetic shi and fu genres.
CHN 116
Introduction to Classical Chinese III
CHN 115;  or Consent of Instructor.
Translations of extended readings in the original sources and brief analyses of syntax. These sources will include texts written by well-known figures from the 8th through 15th centuries, composing in a wide variety of genres.
CHN 120
Advanced Chinese
CHN 113;  Or placement exam or consent of instructor.
Evaluation of readings from various genres (literature, newspapers, TV and movies, etc.) develop advanced reading, writing, aural comprehension, and formal/professional speech skills in Mandarin Chinese. Chinese society/cultural studies, especially those sociocultural issues reflected in the language used in learning materials.
CHN 130
Readings in Traditional Chinese Fiction
CHN 111;  Or equivalent language proficiency.
Examination of representative works of traditional Chinese fiction popular from the 12th Century until the 17th and 18th centuries. Translations in English of the Chinese texts will be available to students as reference.
CHN 131
Readings in Traditional Chinese Poetry
CHN 111;  Consent of Instructor.  Or equivalent language proficiency.
Traditional Chinese poetry from its beginnings to the golden ages of Tang and Song, surveying forms and poets that best reveal the Chinese poetic sensibility and the genius of the language of Chinese poetry.
CHN 132
Readings in Modern Chinese Poetry
CHN 111;  Consent of Instructor.  Or equivalent language proficiency.
Chinese poetry from the Literary Revolution of 1917 to the present, surveying works that embody exciting innovations and reflect the modernity of 20th-century Chinese society and culture.
CHN 133
Readings in Modern Chinese Prose & Drama
CHN 111;  Or equivalent language proficiency.
Literary works and scholarly essays on selected topics of Chinese prose and drama, development of a deep understanding of Chinese culture and society through sophisticated reading materials of these two important genres of the modern period. Conducted in Chinese.
CHN 134
Chinese Film in Chinese Language
CHN 111;  Or equivalent language proficiency.
Chinese film and scholarly essays on Chinese cinema and film history. Develop a deep understanding of Chinese culture and society through viewing and studying Chinese films in the Chinese language.
CHN 140
Readings in Classical Chinese
Consent of Instructor.
Study and philological analysis of selected texts from the first millennium of Imperial China.
CHN 150
Fifth-Year Chinese: Selected Topics in Chinese Language, Literature, & Culture  
CHN 120;  Or placement exam or consent of instructor.
Examination of literary works and scholarly essays on selected topics of Chinese culture and society. Development of a deep understanding of Chinese culture and society through sophisticated Chinese speaking and writing exercises.
CHN 160
The Chinese Language
CHN 006 (can be concurrent) or CHN 003BL (can be concurrent) or CHN 003CN (can be concurrent) or CHN 004A (can be concurrent);  Or placement exam or consent of instructor. LIN 001 recommended.
Introduction to structural features of Chinese (Mandarin) sounds, lexicon, grammar, and writing (characters), as well as relevant dialectal and sociolinguistic issues of the language. 
CHN 192
Chinese Internship
Upper division standing and consent of instructor.
Work experience in the Chinese language, with analytical term paper on a topic approved by instructor.
CHN 194H
Senior Thesis Honors Project
Consent of Instructor.  Senior standing and qualification for the Chinese honors program.
Guided research, under the direction of a faculty member, leading to a senior honors thesis on a topic in Chinese literature, civilization, or language studies.
CHN 197T
Tutoring in Chinese
Consent of Department.
Leading of small voluntary discussion groups affiliated with one of the Department's regular courses.
CHN 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

CHN 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

CHN 297
Directed Independent Study
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to graduate students.
Directed independent study on a topic culminating in a term paper. Independent studies may only be arranged with consent of the instructor and when graduate seminars are unavailable.
CHN 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.

CHN 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Any course taught by a graduate student under the direction of the Director.
CLA 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

CLA 101A
Topics in Ancient Mediterranean Civilizations
A lower division Classics (CLA) course or consent of instructor.
Topics may be ordered by time or place (e.g. Hellenistic Egypt) or by theme or genre (e.g. slavery in the ancient world).
CLA 101B
Topics in Greek Civilization
A lower division Classics (CLA) course or consent of instructor.
Topics may be ordered by time or place (e.g. the world of Homer) or by theme or genre (e.g. the Greek art of war).
CLA 101C
Topics in Roman Civilization
A lower division Classics (CLA) course or consent of instructor.
Topics may be ordered by time or place (e.g. Julius Caesar and his age) or by theme or genre (e.g. gladiators: blood in the arena).
CLA 101D
Topics in Classical Receptions
A lower division Classics (CLA) course or consent of instructor.
Topics in classical reception from late antiquity to the present. Topics may be ordered by time or place (e.g. the classical tradition in Washington, D.C.) or by theme or genre (e.g. cinematic representations of the ancient world).
CLA 101E
Topics in Ancient Science
CLA 050 or CLA 051;  or Consent of Instructor.
Topics may be ordered by discipline (e.g. ancient medicine), historical figure (e.g. Galen) or topic (e.g. science and the economy). 
CLA 102
Film & the Classical World
A lower division Classics (CLA) course or consent of instructor.
Classical World as portrayed in films. Viewings and discussions of modern versions of ancient dramas, modern dramas set in the Ancient Mediterranean world, and films imbued with classical themes and allusions. Supplementary readings in ancient literature and mythology.
CLA 105
Theory & Practice of Greek & Roman Mythology
A lower division Classics (CLA) course or consent of instructor.
Thematically focused study of mythological narratives. Emphasis on the historical development of myths and the variety of theoretical approaches for the study of myth. 
CLA 110
Origins of Rhetoric
A lower division Classics (CLA) course or consent of instructor.
Issues in the development of rhetoric from its origins in ancient Greece to A.D.430. Special attention  to works of Plato, Aristotle, Cicero, and Quintilian. Role of grammar and rhetoric in schools of Roman Empire. The Christian rhetoric of Saint Augustine.
CLA 120
Greek & Roman Historiography
A lower division Classics (CLA) course or consent of instructor.
Survey of Greek and Roman historical writing in English translation. Authors to be read may include Herodotus, Thucydides, Sallust, Livy, and Tacitus. Focus on the development of historical writing as a literary genre. 
CLA 125
Roman Political Thought
A lower division Classics (CLA) course or consent of instructor.
Survey of Roman thinking about politics, as expressed both in formal theorizing and in a variety of other contexts, including oratory, historiography, and epic. Study of Roman political reflection in its historical, cultural, and literary context.
CLA 140
Homer & Ancient Epic
A lower division Classics (CLA) course or consent of instructor.
Reading of the classical epics of Homer (Iliad, Odyssey) and Virgil (Aeneid) in English. Discussion of techniques of composition, the beliefs and values of their respective societies, and the generic tradition of ancient epic.
CLA 141
Greek & Roman Comedy
A lower division Classics (CLA) course or consent of instructor.
Readings in Aristophanes, Menander, Plautus, and Terence; lectures on the development of ancient comedy.
CLA 142
Greek & Roman Novel
A lower division Classics (CLA) course or consent of instructor.
Examination of the ancient Greek romances and their development into the grotesque realism of Petronius' Satyricon, and the religious mysticism of Apuleius' The Golden Ass.
CLA 143
Greek Tragedy
A lower division Classics (CLA) course or consent of instructor.
Reading in English of selected plays of Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides. Discussion of the development and influence of Athenian tragedy.
CLA 150
Socrates & Classical Athens
A lower division Classics (CLA) course or consent of instructor.
Study of the major sources of our knowledge of Socrates, assessment of his role in the politics and culture of ancient Athens, his method of teaching, and his place in Western thought.
CLA 171
Mediterranean Bronze Age Archaeology
A lower division Classics (CLA) course or consent of instructor.
Archaeological monuments of the ancient Near East, including Egypt and Mesopotamia, and of Greece and Crete during the Bronze Age. Special emphasis on the problems of state formation and on the co-existence and collapse of Bronze Age societies.
CLA 174
Greek Religion & Society
A lower division Classics (CLA) course or consent of instructor.
Cults, festivals, and rituals of Greek religious practice and their relationship to Greek social and political institutions, and to Greek private life. Includes discussion of major sanctuaries at Olympia, Delphi, Athens, and others.
CLA 190
Senior Seminar
Completion of one upper division course in Latin (LAT), Greek (GRK) or Hebrew (HEB) or consent of instructor.
Advanced interdisciplinary study of a problem in the ancient Mediterranean world using the techniques of history, archaeology, art history and philology.
CLA 194HA
Special Study for Honors Students
Admission to the Honors Program; consent of faculty member supervising honors thesis.
Directed reading, research and writing culminating in the completion of a senior honors thesis under the direction of faculty advisor.
CLA 194HB
Special Study for Honors Students
Admission to the Honors Program and consent of faculty member supervising honors thesis.
Directed reading, research, and writing culminating in the completion of a senior honors thesis under the direction of faculty advisor.
CLA 197TC
Community Tutoring in Classical Languages
Consent of Instructor.
Supervised instruction of Greek or Latin in nearby schools by qualified students in department.
CLA 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.

CLA 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.

CLA 200A
Approaches to the Classical Past
Graduate student status or consent of instructor.
Survey of major areas of classical scholarship, with special emphasis on the continuing impact of Mediterranean antiquity on later literature, history, art, and culture.
CLA 200B
Approaches to the Classics Past
CLA 200A;  Graduate student status or consent of instructor.Restricted to graduate students.
Research project on major area of Classical scholarship, with special emphasis on the continuing impact of Mediterranean antiquity on later literature, history, art, and culture.
CLA 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.

CLA 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Graduate standing.

CLH 200
Introduction to Translational Research
Consent of Instructor.  One of the following degrees: MD, DDS, DMD, OD, ND, DO, PharmD, DVM, PhD or DNS in nursing; application and acceptance into the Clinical Research Graduate Group, K30 program or other SOM/CTSC training programs.
Introduction to the CRGG program and overview of major clinical research topics. Overview of basic clinical skills needed to accomplish CRGG mentored research project.
CLH 201
Strategies for Grant Writing
Consent of Instructor.  Completed one of the following degrees: MD, DDS, DMD, OD, ND, DO, PharmD, DVM, PhD or DNS in nursing. Application and acceptance into the Clinical Research Graduate Group, K30 program or other SOM/CTSC training program.
Practical skills and strategies to create successful grant proposals in NIH style/format. Generating ideas, identifying and accessing research resources, grant components, specific aims, background and significance, preliminary studies, budgets, and bios. Matriculation through UC system, and resubmissions. (Former MDS 461CR.)
CLH 202
Introduction to Clinical Research
Consent of Instructor.  Completed one of the following degrees: MD, DDS, DMD, OD, ND, DO, PharmD, DVM, PhD or DNS in nursing; application and acceptance into the Clinical Research Graduate Group, MRCTP program, Clinical Research Certificate or other SOM/CTSC training programs.
Anatomy and physiology of conducting clinical epidemiologic research. Familiarity with three basic study designs: cross-sectional, case-control, and cohort. Discussion of principles of measurements in clinical epidemiological studies, basic methods for analyzing data, and ethical issues involved in conducting research.
CLH 203
Methods in Clinical Research
Consent of Instructor.  Completed one of the following degrees: MD, DDS, DMD, OD, ND, DO, PharmD, DVM, PhD or DNS in nursing; application and acceptance into the Clinical Research Graduate Group, K30 program or other SOM traing programs.
Overview of major approaches to clinical research, including health services research techniques, informatics, GCRC, and preclinical methodologies to enhance clinical projects. Overview of UC Davis clinical research support infrastructure. Methodologies applicable to clinical research and its multi-disciplinary perspective.
CLH 204
The Ethics of Research
Consent of Instructor.Priority given to those with acceptance into the Clinical Research Graduate Group, K12, T32 or other SOM/CTSC training program.
Acquire information about ethical responsibilities; Explore major questions in ethics; Apply ethical principles, concepts and values; Gain an appreciation of the role of trust in scientific research. Recommend three quarters of CLH204. Must enroll in Fall to continue through Spring.
CLH 207
Team Science
Participation in CTSC Research Education and Training Programs, or consent of instructor.Restricted to 25 students.
Todays scientific challenges necessitate cross-disciplinary engagement and high collaboration levels. Offers guidance on how best to engage in team science to pursue complex questions, work effectively with team members, and produce high impact research that meets societys needs.
CLH 209
Introduction to Grant Writing, II
CLH 208;  Consent of Instructor.Restricted to students who have completed CLH 208.
Second in a two-quarter series. Two-course sequence provides training in practical aspects of competitive grant writing. 
CLH 210Y
Principles & Methods of Comparative Effectiveness Research
Consent of Instructor.  Familiarity with research methodology, and a course in introductory statistics.
Provides an introduction to Comparative Effectiveness Research (CER) and methods for conducting CER.
CLH 211
Critical Assessment of the Biomedical Literature
Consent of Instructor.
Exposure to topical issues and controversies in the design of interdisciplinary translational research, with an emphasis on critical assessment of the biomedical and health sciences literature. Extends students knowledge of study design through practical application.
CLH 214A
Biodesign I
Consent of Instructor.Prior approval by instructor required; student must commit to taking both courses; Biodesign I and Biodesign II.
Focuses on the principles of needs identification and invention of biomedical technologies. Two part course provides a basic understanding of the elements of the innovation process and how to translate these principles into biomedical device design.
CLH 214B
Biodesign II
CLH 214A;  Consent of Instructor.Prior approval by instructor required; student must commit to taking both courses; Biodesign I and Biodesign II.
Focuses on the implementation of biomedical technologies and translational process. Two part course provides a basic understanding of the elements of the innovation process and how to translate these principles into biomedical device design. 
CLH 220
Basics of Stem & Progenitor Cells
MCP 200L;  MCP 200; Consent of Intructor; Graduate standing.
Lecture designed for graduate students who have experience in cell culture techniques. Designed to give a broad overview of the field and current cells of interest to the greater research community.
CLH 222
Ethical Issues in Stem Cell Biology
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Critical presentation and analysis of recent articles in stem cell biology and small group discussions of the ethical issues surrounding this area of research.
CLH 225
Stem Cell Biology & current Good Manufacturing Practice
Must have foundational knowledge of biology and chemistry; graduate students preferred, other students upon instructors consent.Graduate students preferred, other students upon instructors consent.
Introduction to human stem cell biology; development of cellular therapeutics based on human stem cells for the treatment of currently incurable diseases; introduction to current Good Manufacturing Practice (cGMP), and theoretical & practical exploration of cGMP to manufacture such cellular therapies.
CLH 230
Congestive Heart Failure, Mechanism of Disease
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Underlying mechanisms of cardiomyopathy and heart failure.  Presentation of fundamental knowledge of and recent basic research on heart failure.   Student team projects: investigation and presentation of a research topic and bench research project to advance research in the same area.    
CLH 231
Current Techniques in Clinical Research
CLH 250;  and Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Current techniques used in clinical research such as electrophysiology, cardiovascular surgery, cardiac catheterization and echocardiography, team science, and patient management. Lectures are presented by experts on each technique, with an emphasis on use in translational research.
CLH 233
Molecular Mechanisms of Disease:  Cancer
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to students pursuing the designated emphasis in Translational Research; graduate standing.
Cutting edge of research on underlying mechanisms of cancer development, progression and preventionclinical trials/drug development, signaling pathways and molecular mechanisms of cancer development, recent basic research on cancer stem cells, genetics and epigenetic events and animal models used.
CLH 240
Predoctoral Clinical Research Training Program Research Integration
Consent of Instructor.  Enrollment in the Predoctoral Clinical Research Training Program in the CTSC, School of Medicine.
Alternating sessions:  journal club, seminar/discussion, and research integration sessions. 
CLH 245
Biostatistics for Biomedical Science 
CLH 244 or SPH 244;  Consent of Instructor.  Or equivalent.
Analysis of data and design of experiments for laboratory data.
CLH 246
Biostatistics for Clinical Research
CLH 245 or SPH 245.
Emphasizes critical biostatistics for clinical research and targets biomedical audience. Students will develop understanding for basic planning and analysis of clinical studies and learn to develop collaborations with biostatisticians.
CLH 247
Statistical Analysis for Laboratory Data
CLH 245 or SPH 245.
Statistical methods for experimental design and analysis of laboratory data including gene expression arrays, RNA-Seq, and mass spec.
CLH 290A
Hot Topics in Clinical Research
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Seminars presented by guest lecturers on subjects of their own research activities
CLH 290B
Hot Topics in Stem Cell Biology
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Seminars presented by guest lecturers on subjects of their own research
CLH 290C
Literature in Stem Cell Biology
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Critical presentation and analysis of recent journal articles in stem cell biology by students.
CLH 290D
Literature in Translational Research
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Critical presentation and analysis of recent journal articles in translational research by students.
CLH 298
Group Study in Clinical Research
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to students enrolled in the Mentored Clinical Research Training Program.
Special topics in Clinical Research appropriate for group study at the graduate level.  
CLH 299
Clinical Research
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to students enrolled in the Mentored Clinical Research Training Program.
Independent research and special topics in clinical research appropriate for graduate level.  
CMN 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

CMN 102
Empirical Methods in Communication
STA 013 or STA 013Y;  Or equivalent of STA 013.
Social scientific research methods employed in Communication. Topics include research design, measurement, sampling, questionnaire construction, survey research, experimental design, content analysis and qualitative field methods.
CMN 132
Social Media for Public Relations
CMN 131.
Uses of social media technologies in contemporary public relations practice. Social and behavioral theories of social media processes and effects. Strategies and tools for authoring content that builds relationships and creates conversations with key publics. 
CMN 139
Advanced Organizational Communication
CMN 136.Pass One open to Communication majors only.
Communication processes within and among social organizations. Examines formal organizations as information processing systems. Topics include general systems theory, input-output analysis, structural-functionalism, cybernetics, organizational network analysis, organization environments, organizations as cultures, organizational learning, information technologies, and communication diagnostic/auditing strategies.  
CMN 152V
Social Science with Online Data
Programming experience helpful, but not required.
Survey of web-driven social science and its methods.Focus on web scraping and social media APIs. Covers wrangling and analysis of data from social networks, online experiments, and other digital traces. Python programming skills helpful, but not assumed.
CMN 180
Current Topics in Communication
CMN 101;  CMN 102;  Or a research methods course equivalent to CMN 102.Pass One  open to Communication majors only.
Group study of a special topic in communication.
CMN 189A
Proseminar in Social Interaction
CMN 101;  CMN 102;  CMN 136;  and Consent of Instructor.Open to Communication majors only.
Reading, discussion, research, and writing on a selected topic in the specialty of social interaction. Potential topics include relationship initiation, maintenance, and deterioration; communication failure; nonverbal communication; conversational management; semantics and pragmatics of languages; and family/marital communication.
CMN 189B
Proseminar in Mass Communication
CMN 101;  CMN 102;  CMN 140;  and Consent of Instructor.Open to Communication majors only.
Reading, discussion, research, and writing on a selected topic in the specialty of mass communication. Potential topics include, agenda-setting, the cultivation of beliefs, television violence, media portrayals of underprivileged groups, mediated political discourse, interactive technologies, and international/global communications.
CMN 189C
Proseminar in Health Communication
CMN 101;  CMN 102;  (CMN 161 or CMN 165);  and Consent of Instructor.Open to Communication majors only.
Reading, discussion, research, and writing on a selected topic in health communication. Potential topics include health communication design and evaluation, media advocacy, physician-patient interaction, uses of communication technologies in health settings, and health-related advertising.
CMN 189D
Proseminar in Organizational Communication
CMN 101;  CMN 102;  CMN 136;  and Consent of Instructor.Open to Communication majors only.
Reading, discussion, research, and writing on a selected topic in the specialty of organizational communication. Potential topics include organizational networks, organizational conflict and its resolution, mediation, bargaining and negotiation, superior-subordinate interaction, leadership styles, and inter-organizational communication.
CMN 189E
Proseminar in Information & Communication Technologies
Consent of Instructor.
Reading, discussion, research and writing on a selected topic in information and communication technologies. Potential topics include the role played by digital technologies in social change, serious games for change, and virtual and offline worlds.
CMN 192
Internship in Communication
Consent of Instructor.  Communication majors who have completed 20 units of upper division communication courses.Open to Communication majors only.
Supervised work experience requiring the application of communication principles and strategies or the evaluation of communication practices in a professional setting. Relevant experiences include public relations, advertising, sales, human resources, health promotion, political campaigns, journalism, and broadcasting.
CMN 194H
Senior Honors Thesis
Senior standing and approval by Honors Committee.
Directed reading, research, and writing culminating in the preparation of honors thesis under direction of faculty advisor.
CMN 197T
Tutoring in Communication
Upper division standing with major in Communication and consent of Department Chairperson.
Tutoring in undergraduate Communication courses, including leadership of discussion groups affiliated with departmental courses.
CMN 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

CMN 201
Theoretical Perspectives on Communication
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing in Communication.Open to Communication graduate students only.
Social scientific study of Communication. Research on interpersonal, organizational, mass, political, and health communication; communication technologies (e.g., video games, social media, persuasive technologies); and communication network analysis.
CMN 202
Communication Theory Construction
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Alternative meta-theoretical perspectives for theory generation in communication inquiry. Processes of construct explication, operationalization and theory construction. Emphasis on the critique of extant communication theories and the development of theory construction skills. 
CMN 203
Scientific Methods for Communication
CMN 201;  CMN 202;  PSC 204A;  PSC 204B;  Or equivalents.
Social scientific research methods commonly employed in Communication. Topics include research design measurement sampling questionnaire construction survey research experimental design evaluation research content analysis and qualitative field methods.
CMN 210
Experimental Methods & Analysis in Communication
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing; one course in inferential statistics.
Experimental designs in communication. Topics include: causation; threats to validity; conceptualization, operationalization, and measurement; hypothesis testing; ethics; data analysis software focusing on the analysis of variance and planned contrasts; and the practical and effective implementation and writing of experiments.
CMN 211
Survey Research Methods in Communication
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing; one course in inferential statistics.
Methods for designing personal interview, phone, mail, and web-based surveys in communication. Topics include: sampling strategies, sources of error and bias in survey designs, questionnaire construction, cognitive interviewing, interviewer behavior, and analysis of complex survey data using standard software packages.
CMN 212
Web Science Research Methods
Consent of Instructor.
Applications of data science to web-based communication research. Design, implementation, analysis, and reporting of studies using online data. Use of Python to scrape, organize, analyze, and visualize web data.
CMN 213
Simulation Methods in Communication Research
Consent of Instructor.
Simulation methods for modeling human communication. Single and multiple agent approaches to developing process theories of cooperation, coordination, strategic behavior, information and innovation diffusion, and other aspects of sociality.
CMN 220
Persuasion Theories & Message Design 
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Major social scientific theories and perspectives on attitude change and persuasion. Application of persuasion theories and principles to persuasive message design in applied contexts.
CMN 221
Communication & Cognition
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Explores the cognitive structures and processes that enable the production, comprehension and interpretation of messages in face-to-face and mediated communication contexts. Explores the communication outcomes associated with these processes.
CMN 222
Risk Communication
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Theories and models of individual risk information processing. Media depictions of threats and risk-related information and their potential effects on audiences. Implications for the design and implementation of messages concerning threat and risk.    
CMN 230
Social Interaction Theory & Research
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Survey of theories and research on social interaction and interpersonal communication. Covers communication codes, individual differences in communication, communication and relationship development, family communication, conflict, cognitive and emotional processes underlying social interaction, social influence, intercultural communication, and nonverbal behavior.
CMN 231
Tactics of Interpersonal Influence
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Achievement of interpersonal goals in social interaction. Topics include message production; tactics, strategies and planning; anticipating potential obstacles; resisting and thwarting goals; plan recognition; and goal detection. Examined goals include compliance gaining, attitude change, ingratiation, information seeking, comforting, and deception.
CMN 232
Health Communication
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Health communication theories and research traditions. Topics include consumer health information seeking; physician-patient interaction; information, social marketing, edutainment, and media advocacy campaigns;  social networks and coping; media influences on health; and new communication technologies in health promotion and healthcare delivery.
CMN 235
Health Communication Campaigns
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to graduate students.
Principles of health communication campaign planning, implementation and evaluation. Strategies for changing health behaviors, shaping policy, and improving healthcare organizations relations with stakeholders.
CMN 244
Organizational Communication 
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Theory and research on communication processes in organizations.
CMN 250
Mediated Communication Theory & Research
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Survey of major theories on the intended and unintended effects of mediated communication. Topics include media's effects on learning, political behavior, interpersonal violence, sexual socialization, consumer behavior, race relations, gender socialization, and cultural processes. 
CMN 252
Computer-Mediated Communication
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

CMN 254
Communication Campaigns
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Strategic uses of media and interpersonal channels to promote social change through social marketing, information, and media advocacy campaigns. Focus on theory-based interventions in a variety of applied contexts.
CMN 280
Special Topics in Social Interaction
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Reading, discussion, research, and writing on a selected topic in the specialty of social interaction. 
CMN 281
Special Topics in Mediated Communication
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Reading, discussion, research, and writing on a selected topic in the speciality of mediated communication.
CMN 282
Special Topics in Health Communication
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Reading, discussion, research and writing on a focused topic in health communication.
CMN 283
Special Topics in Organizational Communication
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Reading, discussion, research, and writing on a selected topic in the specialty of organizational communication.
CMN 299R
Thesis/Dissertation Research & Writing
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing in Communication.
Students in the Department of Communication graduate programs conduct dissertation research and writing under the supervision of a faculty member. 
CMN 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Graduate standing.

CNS 092
Internship in Consumer Science
Consent of Instructor.
Internship on and off campus in a consumer science related area.
CNS 100
Consumer Behavior
Preparation in areas of psychology or sociology and economics recommended.
Provides a set of behavioral concepts and theories useful in understanding consumer behavior on the part of the individual, business, and social organizations. Conceptual models to help guide and understand consumer research will be presented.
CNS 192
Internship in Consumer Science
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of a minimum of 84 units.
Internship on and off campus in a consumer science related area
COM 001
Major Books of Western Culture: The Ancient World
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement.
Introduction, through class discussion and frequent written assignments, to some of the major books of western civilization such as The Odyssey, Aeneid, Bible, and Augustine's Confessions.
COM 001
Major Works of the Ancient World
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Introduction, through class discussion and frequent written assignments, to some of the major works of the ancient world (up to 5th century CE) such as The Odyssey, the Bible, Augustine's Confessions, and works by Plato and Confucius. Examined genres include religious texts, the epic, philosophy, drama, poetry. 
COM 002
Major Books of Western Culture: From the Middle Ages to the Enlightenment
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement.
Introduction to the methods of inquiry applied to critical reading and the practice of writing. Focus on texts from the European Middle Ages to the eighteenth century; critical analysis of the historical-cultural developments in this period.
COM 002
Major Works of the Medieval & Early Modern World
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Introduction, through class discussion and frequent written assignments, to some of the major works of the medieval and early modern worlds (6th century to the mid-17th century) such as Dantes Comedy, 1001 Nights, The Tale of Genji, and Elizabethan/Jacobean plays. Examined genres include framed narratives, courtly literature, and early modern drama.
COM 003
Major Books of Western Culture: The Modern Crisis
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement.
Introduction, through class discussion and frequent written assignments, to the major literature and thought of the late eighteenth to the mid-twentieth century.
COM 003
Major Works of the Modern World
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Introduction, through class discussion and frequent written assignments, to some of the major works of the modern world (mid-17th to the mid-20th centuries) such as those by Dostoevsky, Tolstoy, Flaubert, Woolf, Lu Xun, Borges and Yeats. Examined genres include realist fiction, modernist fiction, and modernist poetry. 
COM 004
Major Books of the Contemporary World
Completion of entry level writing requirement.
Comparative study of selected major Western and non-Western texts composed in the period from 1945 to the present. Intensive focus on writing about these texts, with frequent papers written about these works.
COM 004
Major Works of the Contemporary World
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Comparative study of selected major Western and non-Western texts composed in the period from 1945 to the present. Intensive focus on writing about these texts, with frequent papers written about these works.
COM 008
Utopias & Their Transformations
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Consideration, in literary works from different ages, of visionary and rational perceptions of a lost paradise, Golden Age, or Atlantis-and of the inhuman nightmares that can result from perversions of the utopian dream of perfection.
COM 012
Introduction to Women Writers
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Survey of fiction, drama, and poetry by women writers from all continents. Concerns of women compared in light of their varied social and cultural traditions. Literary analysis of voice, imagery, narrative strategies and diction.
COM 013
Dramatic Literature
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Introduction, through careful reading of selected plays, to some of the major forms of Western drama, from the earliest tragedies of ancient Greece to the contemporary American theater.
COM 014
Introduction to Poetry
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Comparative study of poetry in a variety of lyric and other poetic forms from different historical periods and different linguistic, national, and cultural traditions.
COM 022
Literature of the Abnormal Psyche
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Representations of the human psyche in literature and other media (film, visual arts, music) spanning cultures and historical contexts. Depictions of abnormal psychological states, including madness, obsession, and self-fragmentation. Textual interpretation informed by psychological theories. Rhetorical persuasion and nuanced argumentation.
COM 024
Animals in Literature
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Study of literary texts from various periods and cultures whose theme is the representation of animals.
COM 025
Ethnic Minority Writers in World Literature
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Consideration of a broad range of writers who speak from an ethnic perspective different from the nominally or politically dominant culture of their respective countries and who explore the challenges faced by characters significantly affected by their ethnic minority status.
COM 090X
Lower Division Seminar
Consent of Instructor.
Examination of a special topic in a small group setting.
COM 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to lower division students.

COM 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

COM 100
World Cinema
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR), upper division standing, or consent of instructor.
Comparative, cross-cultural study of a topic, theme, or movement in world cinema beyond the boundary of a single national tradition. Topics may include "postsocialist cinemas in East Europe and Asia," "cinema and globalization," and "popular Asian cinemas."
COM 110
Hong Kong Cinema
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR), upper division standing, or consent of instructor.
Hong Kong cinema, its history, industry, styles, genres, directors, and stars. Special attention to its polyglot, multicultural, transnational, colonial, and postcolonial environment.  
COM 112
Japanese Cinema
Consent of Instructor.  Or upper-division standing.
Introduction to Japanese cinema from early silent films to the present. Explores important directors, genres, stars, themes and techniques in relation to specific historical and cultural contexts. Lectures and readings in English. Films in Japanese with English subtitles. 
COM 120
Writing Nature: 1750 to the Present
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Study of representations, descriptions, and discussions of humankind's problematical relationship with the non-human world in texts written in a variety of European and American traditions between 1750 and the present.
COM 138
Gender & Interpretation in the Renaissance
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Critical analysis of Renaissance texts with primary focus on issues such as human dignity, education and gender politics; "high" and "low" culture and its relation to literary practices.
COM 139
Shakespeare & the Classical World
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Shakespeare's representations of the classical world in the light of selected ancient texts and Renaissance conceptions of Antiquity, with special attention to the depiction of politics and history.
COM 141
Introduction to Critical Theoretical Approaches to Literature & Culture
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Introduction to critical theory and its use for interpreting literary texts, film, and media forms in global culture.
COM 142
Critical Reading & Analysis
Consent of Instructor.
Close reading of selected texts; scrutiny of very limited amount of material, with attention to the problems of texts in translation.
COM 144
The Grotesque
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Study of the "grotesque" in selected texts from the Renaissance to the 20th century, with attention to the "grotesque" as a means of social, cultural, and political commentary, as well as of aesthetic innovation.
COM 146
Myth in Literature
COM 006 recommended.
Comparative study of different versions of one or more central myths, with attention to their cultural settings, artistic and literary forms of representation, as well as to their psychological dimensions.
COM 147
Modern Jewish Writers
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Problems of the modern Jewish experience from the perspective of the writer's construction of the self in relation to the future and to the non-Jew. Draws upon Russian, German, Yiddish, and American traditions.
COM 151
Colonial & Postcolonial Experience in Literature
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Literary introduction to the cultural issues of colonialism and postcolonialism through reading, discussing and writing on narratives which articulate diverse points of view.
COM 152
Literature of the Americas
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Study of the various stylistic, historical, social and cultural factors that contribute to a hemispheric vision of American literature, encompassing works by Canadian, United States, Caribbean, Brazilian, and Spanish-American writers.
COM 152S
Literature of the Americas (Taught in Latin America)
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Various stylistic, historical, social, and cultural factors that contribute to a hemispheric vision of American literature, encompassing works by Canadian, United States, Caribbean, Brazilian, and Spanish-American writers. May be taught abroad.
COM 153
The Forms of Asian Literature
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Introduction to distinctive Asian literary forms, such as haiku, noh, the Chinese novel and tale, through reading of major works. Comparison with Western genres and study of native and Western critical traditions.
COM 154
African Literature
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Colonial and post-colonial sub-Saharan African literature and the African oral traditions from which it emerged. Genres and themes of African literature from the 19th century to the present.
COM 157
War & Peace in Literature
COM 001 or COM 002 or COM 003;  or Consent of Instructor.
Through study of a few major works from Western and non-Western literature, illuminates the way in which literature from antiquity to the present has dealt with the antinomy peace/war through the ages.
COM 159
Women in Literature
COM 001, COM 002, COM 003, or COM 004 or the equivalent recommended.
Portrayals of women in literature, comparing selected heroines who represent a particular theme, period, or genre. Texts range around the globe and from ancient to modern works, such as Lysistrata, Emma, Hedda Gabler, The Makioka Sisters, and Top Girls.
COM 164A
The European Middle Ages
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Medieval literary genres as the foundation for modern literary forms. Topics and themes as love, God, vision, nature, history and politics, and sign theory. 
COM 164B
The Renaissance
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Literature, new science, gender, politics, and exploration in European Renaissance. Readings in Petrarch, Machiavelli, Montaigne, Tasso, Ariosto, Stampa, Shakespeare, Lab and Aphra Behn.
COM 164D
The Enlightenment
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Enlightenment writers such as Swift, Voltaire, Sterne, Rousseau, Wollstonecraft, and Kant. Emphasis on the revolutionary impact of 18th-century philosophical ideas and literary forms on modern political, social, and aesthetic culture.
COM 165
Caribbean Literatures
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Comparative approach to the multi-lingual, multi-cultural literatures of the Caribbean. Works from English, French, and Spanish speaking regions with special attention to problems of identity, diaspora and resistance, class, gender, race.
COM 166B
The Novel
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
The novel as global genre: picaresque, epistolary, Bildungsroman, historical novel, contemporary forms. 
COM 167
Comparative Study of Major Authors
Consent of Instructor.
Pivotal works of artists in the Western mainstream, such as Dante, Shakespeare, Cervantes, Goethe, Tolstoi, Proust, and Joyce.
COM 168A
Romanticism
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Introduction to the Romantic movement with emphasis upon Romantic concepts of the self, irony, love, the imagination and artistic creativity, and the relationship of the individual to nature and society.
COM 168B
Realism & Naturalism
Consent of Instructor.
Novels and plays by Dickens, Zola, Flaubert, Dreiser, Ibsen, and Strindberg investigate marriage & adultery, the city & its perils, the hardships of industrialization, the war between the sexes, the New Woman, and other 19th-century themes.
COM 180
Selected Topics in Comparative Literature
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR); at least one course in literature.
Study of a selected topic or topics appropriate to student and facultyinterests and areas of specialization of the instructor.
COM 180S
Selected Topics in Comparative Literature (Taught Abroad)
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR); at least one course in literature or consent of instructor.
Study of selected topics appropriate to student and faculty interests and areas of specialization of the instructor. May be taught abroad.
COM 192
Internship in Comparative Literature
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of 84 units.Restricted to Comparative Literature majors.
Internships in fields where students can practice their skills.
COM 194H
Special Study for Honors Students
Consent of Instructor.  Open only to majors of senior standing who qualify for Honors Program.
Guided research, under the direction of a faculty member approved by the Program Director, leading to a senior honors thesis on a comparativetopic.
COM 195
Senior Seminar in Comparative Literature
Senior standing as a Comparative Literature major or minor or consent of instructor.Open only to Comparative Literature majors or minors in or consent of instructor.
Advanced study of selected topics and texts in Comparative Literature, with explicit emphasis on the theoretical and interpretive approaches that define Comparative Literature as a discipline and distinguish it from other literary disciplines. Required for the major.
COM 197T
Tutoring in Comparative Literature
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing with declared major in Comparative Literature.
Tutoring in undergraduate courses including leadership in small voluntary discussion groups affiliated with current courses offered by Comparative Literature.
COM 210
Topics & Themes in Comparative Literature
Graduate standing in Comparative Literature, English, or a foreign-language literature, or consent of instructor.
Comparative, interpretive study of the treatment of specific topics and themes in literary works from various periods, societies, and cultures, in light of these works' historical and sociocultural contexts.
COM 214
Approaches to Lyric Poetry
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Analysis and interpretation of poetic texts in different historical periods and national literatures, with consideration of major theoretical developments in the understanding of poetic discourse.
COM 215
Forms of the Spiritual Quest
Graduate standing or consent of instructor; knowledge of at least one foreign language.
An exploration, culminating in a research paper, of changing forms of the quest for transcendence in different cultures, mainly in major works of Western literature, but also in other traditions and from the perspectives of other disciplines.
COM 220
Literary Genres
Graduate standing in Comparative Literature, English, or a foreign-language literature or consent of instructor.
Comparative literature of major works in a particular genre from various linguistic, national, and cultural traditions, with particular attention to historical developments within the genre and to genre theory.
COM 238
Gender & Interpretation
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Study of how literary texts from different periods, societies, and cultures represent gender roles and gender hierarchy, building on recent work on gender in anthropology, literature, psychology, and women's studies.
COM 255
Proseminar: Comparative Literature: Past, Present, Future
Graduate standing.Restricted to graduate students.
History, theory, and methodology of comparative literature. Issues of national literature, world literature, and comparative literature. Relation of comparative literature to other disciplines and diverse expressions. Discussion of current problems in teaching and research in comparative literature. Required of M.A. and Ph.D. candidates.
COM 260
Contexts of the 19th-Century Novel
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Development in 19th-century history, culture, and society in relation to major trends in the 19th-century novel.
COM 297
Directed Independent Study in Primary, Secondary, or Third Literature 
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to graduate students.
Directed Independent Study in Primary, Secondary, or Third Literature culminating in term paper. Only for languages with no graduate course offerings.
COM 298
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

COM 390
Teaching Comparative Literature in College
Appointment as a Comparative Literature Associate Instructor or consent of instructor.Restricted to graduate students.
Discussion of the theory and practice of teaching composition at the college level in a department of comparative literature in relation to the major cultural and social developments and with specific application to the introductory COM 001, COM 002, COM 003, COM 004.
COM 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Graduate standing.

CRD 092
Internship
Consent of Instructor.
Supervised internship, off and on campus, in community and institutional settings.
CRD 098
Directed Group Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

CRD 118
Technology & Society
CRD 001 or CRD 002 or SOC 001 or ANT 002.
Impact of technology on labor relations, employment, industrial development and international relations. Internal relations of technology development and deployment.
CRD 140
Dynamics of Regional Development
CRD 001 or CRD 002 or SOC 001 or ANT 002.
Industrial cluster formation and institutions. Technology, labor relations and interfirm linkages in global value chains. California and other regions are used as case studies.
CRD 141
Organization of Economic Space
CRD 001 or CRD 002 or SOC 001 or ANT 002.
Globalization and technological restructuring of economic activity focusing on new spatial patterns of production and circulation and their implications for workers, communities and societies, both in the U.S. and around the globe.
CRD 142
Rural Change in the Industrialized World
SOC 001 or CRD 001 or CRD 002 or ANT 002.
Geography of rural environment with emphasis on rural restructuring. Demographics, community, economy, governance, agriculture, and environmental conservation in rural areas of industrialized world. Case studies from and comparisons drawn between North America, Europe, Australia, New Zealand, and Japan.
CRD 150
Quantitative Methods in Community Research
SOC 046B or STA 013 or STA 032;  Consent of Instructor.
Introduction to statistical analysis of social data relevant to community research, planning and assessment, emphasizing data sources and acquisition, descriptive and inferential analysis techniques, and data interpretation and presentation. Emphasis on spatial data and methods, focusing on the sources, processing, analysis, and presentation of spatial data in a community assessment context.
CRD 151
Community Field Research: Theory & Analysis
CRD 001;  (STA 013 or STA 013Y or SOC 046B);  any upper division Community & Regional Development (CRD) course recommended.
Design and analysis of community research considering the relationship between theory and practice. Community research methods, including elite interviewing, ethnographic approaches, and statistical methods, descriptive statistics and OLS regression. Requires design and completion of field research project. 
CRD 151
Community Field Research: Theory & Analysis
CRD 001;  (STA 013 or STA 013Y or SOC 046B);  any upper division Community & Regional Development (CRD) course recommended.
Design and analysis of community research considering the relationship between theory and practice. Community research methods, including elite interviewing, ethnographic approaches, and statistical methods, descriptive statistics and OLS regression. Requires design and completion of field research project. 
CRD 152
Community Development
CRD 001 or CRD 151 or SOC 002 or ANT 002 or ASA 100 or CHI 132 or AAS 101.
Introduction to principles and strategies of community organizing and development. Examination of non-profit organizations, citizen participation, poverty reduction, community needs assessment, and regional development strategies. Comparison of community development approaches of the U.S.A./California with other western and non-western societies.
CRD 153A
International Community Development:  Asia
Consent of Instructor.  2.000 GPA; good academic standing.For summer and quarter abroad versions, limited to 30 students; for the Seminar Abroad version, limited to 15 students; this allows for the small group learning methodology as well as the active collaboration with in-country university students; available for undergraduate and graduate students; applications through UC Davis Study Aboard accepted on a first-come, first-reserved basis for qualified applicants.
Examination and analysis of community development efforts in a range of Asian countries and the impact of global forces in different settings. Includes classroom lectures, workshops, field trips, and collaborative action research projects. Taught abroad.
CRD 153B
International Community Development: Europe
ANT 002 or IAD 010 or CRD 001 or CRD 002 or SOC 001 or SOC 002 or POL 001.
Examination and analysis of community development efforts in Europe and the impact of global forces in different settings. Alternative strategies with emphasis on self-reliance and locally controlled development. Based in Freiburg, Germany, including field trips to France and Switzerland; taught abroad.
CRD 153C
International Community Development: Africa
CRD 001 or CRD 002 or ANT 002 or IAD 010 or SOC 001 or SOC 002 or POL 001.
Examination and analysis of community development efforts in Africa and the impact of global forces in urban and rural settings. Focus on strategies that promote self-reliance and locally controlled development. Based in South Africa; includes field trips.   
CRD 154
Social Theory & Community Change
CRD 001 or SOC 001 or ANT 002.
Comparative overview of the dominant social science paradigms for the study of community development and change. Among the paradigms discussed are functionalism, conflict theory/Marxism, structuralism, methodological individualism, reflexive modernity.
CRD 154
Social Theory & Community Change
CRD 001 or SOC 001 or ANT 002;  or Consent of Instructor.
Comparative overview of the dominant social science paradigms for the study of community development and change. Among the paradigms discussed are functionalism, conflict theory/Marxism, structuralism, community capitals, social exchange, post-positivism, feminist theories and social constructivism.
CRD 156
Community Economic Development
CRD 152 or PLS 021 or ECS 015;  and Consent of Instructor.
How government and community organizations help firms grow and create jobs through local economic development corporations, small business centers, revolving loan funds, incubators, and other programs. Techniques to analyze community economic potential and identification of appropriate intervention tools. Group project.
CRD 158
Small Community Governance
CRD 001 or SOC 001 or POL 001.
Governing institutions and political processes in rural and small urban places. Local government organization, community autonomy, leadership, political change, policy development, and select policy issues including public finance. Field research on political processes or policy issues in select communities.
CRD 158
Community Governance
CRD 001 or SOC 001 or POL 001.
Governing institutions and political processes at the local level. Local government organization, community autonomy, leadership, political change, policy development, and select policy issues including public finance. Topics change depending on student interest. Field research on coalition building or policy issues in select communities.
CRD 162
People, Work & Technology
CRD 001 or SOC 001 or ANT 001;  Upper division standing recommended.
Analysis of the relationship between work, technology, and the human experience. Theories of the causes and consequences of labor process, changes under capitalism and globalization, impacts of race/ethnicity, class, gender, and citizenship status on work in the United States and globally; responses of workers, communities, and policy-makers to workplace changes. 
CRD 164
Theories of Organizations & Their Role in Community Change
(STA 013 or STA 013Y or SOC 046B);  (CRD 001 or CRD 002 or SOC 001 or ANT 002).
Planned change within and through community organizations. Private voluntary organizations, local community associations, and local government. Relationship between community organizations and social capital. Collaborative original data gathering and professional report writing.
CRD 172
Social Inequality: Issues & Innovations
CRD 001 or CRD 002 or SOC 001 or ANT 002;  Upper division standing recommended.
Focus on the dimensions, causes, and means of alleviating social inequality in the U.S. Examination and analysis of major theories and forms (class, race/ethnicity, gender, and citizenship status) of inequality. Policy-based and grassroots approaches to change.               
CRD 176
Comparative Ethnicity
CRD 001 or CRD 002 or SOC 001 or ANT 002;  Upper division standing recommended.
Role of ethnicity in shaping social systems and interaction. Analytical approaches to and issues arising from the study of ethnicity, through utilization of data from a range of different societies.
CRD 180
Transnational Community Development
CRD 001 or ANT 002 or SOC 001.
The effects of grassroots, non-state, non-corporate actors from abroad on local, national and international development. Socioeconomic, political, and cultural implications of transnational actions undertaken by international non-governmental organizations, individual migrants, and migrant grassroots civic organizations.
CRD 192
Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of 84 units.
Supervised internship, off and on campus, in community and institutionalsettings.
CRD 194HA
Special Study for Honors Students 
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of 135 units at the time of enrollment; GPA 3.500 in the major; GPA 3.300 in overall standing; completion of at least four upper division courses; agreement of a faculty member to serve as thesis advisor.
Community & Regional Development Honors is a program of direct reading, research and writing culminating in the preparation of a Senior Honors Thesis under the direction of a faculty advisor.
CRD 194HB
Special Study for Honors Student
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of 135 units at the time of enrollment; GPA 3.500 in the major; GPA 3.300 in overall standing; completion of at least four upper division courses; agreement of a faculty member to serve as thesis advisor.
Community & Regional Development Honors is a program of direct reading, research and writing culminating in the preparation of a Senior Honors Thesis under the direction of a faculty advisor.
CRD 197T
Tutoring in Community & Regional Development
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing; completion of course to be tutored.
Assisting instructor in one of the Community & Regional Development's regular courses by tutoring individual students or small groups of students in a laboratory, in voluntary discussion groups, or other voluntary activities. 
CRD 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.
CRD 230
Spatial Methods in Community Research
Graduate standing.
Spatial analysis of social data relevant to community research, with focus on neighborhoods as units of analysis. Clustering, segregation, geodemographic modelling, spatial regression, mulitlevel models, spatial data management, accessibility.
CRD 241
The Economics of Community Development
Graduate standing.
Economic theories and methods of planning for communities. Human resources, community services and infrastructure, industrialization and technological change, and regional growth. The community's role in the greater economy.
CRD 242
Community Development Organizations
CRD 240;  and Consent of Instructor.Limited to 15 students.
Theory and praxis of organizations with social change agendas at the community level. Emphasis on non-profit organizations and philanthropic foundations.
CRD 242S
Community Development Organizations (International)
CRD 240.Limited to 10 students.
Theory and praxis of organizations with social change agendas at the community level. Emphasis on local governance, non-profit organizations and philanthropic foundations at an international level. May be taught abroad.
CRD 243
Critical Environmental Justice Studies
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students only.
Application of social science theories of race, ethnicity, class, gender, and power to understand the production and contestation of environmental inequities.
CRD 244
Political Ecology of Community Development
Graduate standing.
Community development from the perspective of geographical political ecology.  Social and environmental outcomes of the dynamic relationship between communities and land-based resources, and between social groups. Cases of community conservation and development in developing and industrialized countries.
CRD 245
The Political Economy of Urban & Regional Development
CRD 157;  CRD 244;  Or equivalent.
How global, political and economic restructuring and national and state policies are mediated by community politics; social production of urban form; role of the state in uneven development; dynamics of urban growth and decline; regional development in California.
CRD 246
The Political Economy of Transnational Migration
Graduate standing.
Theoretical perspectives and empirical research on social, cultural, political, and economic processes of transnational migration to the U.S. Discussion of conventional theories will precede contemporary comparative perspectives on class, race, ethnicity, citizenship, and the ethnic economy.
CRD 247
Transformation of Work
Graduate standing in history or social science degree program or consent of instructor.
Exploration of the ways that the experience, organization, and systems of work are being reconfigured in the late-20th century. The impacts of economic restructuring on local communities and workers.
CRD 248
Social Policy, Welfare Theories & Communities 
Graduate standing.
Theories and comparative histories of modern welfare states and social policy in relation to legal/normative, organizational, and administrative aspects. Analysis of specific social issues within the U.S./California context.
CRD 248A
Social Policy, Welfare Theories & Communities I
Graduate standing.
Theories and comparative histories of modern welfare states. Theories of welfare & social policy in relation to normative, organizational, and administrative aspects of welfare & social policy. 
CRD 248B
Social Policy, Welfare Theories & Communities II
Graduate standing.Concurrent enrollment in CRD 248A.
Analysis of a specific set of social issues within the U.S./California context. Issues may include poverty, hunger, housing, health, family, disability, economic opportunity, affirmative action orientations, gender, old age, or special social groups.
CRD 250
Professional Skills for Community Development
CRD 240.Priority enrollment for Masters & Ph.D. students in Community & Regional Development.
Help develop the practical skills needed to work professionally in organizations that are involved in community development. Provides an overview of community development planning, project management, and consultation skills.
CRD 292
Graduate Internship
Consent of Instructor.
Individually designed supervised internship, off campus, in community or institutional setting. Developed with advice of faculty mentor.
CRD 293
Community Development Graduate Proseminar
Enrollment in Community Development graduate group.Restricted to first year Community Development graduate students only.
Introduction to graduate training in Community Development. Seminar designed to introduce students entering graduate work in the Community Development Graduate Group to its ongoing activities.
CRI 101
Introduction to Critical Theoretical Approaches to Literature & Culture
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Introduction to critical theory and its use for interpreting literary texts, film, and media forms in our present global culture.
CRI 200C
History of Critical Theory
Graduate student standing.Restricted to Graduate students.
Critical analysis and discussion of pre-20th century theories of literary and cultural criticism. Topics may include but are not limited to: ancient and early modern philosophy; nature and culture in the Renaissance; theories of Mimesis from antiquity to the Renaissance.
CRI 201
Critical Theory Special Topics
Graduate student standing.
Application of theoretical principles to one specific research topic. May be repeated for credit with consent of instructor when topic differs.
CRI 298
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to Graduate student standing.

CRI 299
Individual Study
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate student standing.

CST 200A
Histories of Cultural Studies
Graduate standing or consent of instructor required. Undergraduate coursework in the humanities or social sciences recommended.
Histories and traditions of cultural studies internationally;  multiple legacies of cultural studies as a field of inquiry in various geographical contexts; foregrounds important critical perspectives resulting from social and intellectual movements world-wide.
CST 200B
Theories of Cultural Studies
CST 200A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Definitions of "critical" scholarship and examination of various contexts in which cultural studies theory has emerged worldwide. Both mainstream and alternative theoretical traditions, such as those developed by people of color and by other minoritized groups.
CST 200C
Practices of Cultural Studies
CST 200A;  CST 200B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Methodological and practical applications of cultural studies research. Critical analyses of ethnography, textual analysis, social change, community development, and identity formation. Emphasis given to students' unique versions of cultural studies practices.
CST 204
History & Theory of Sexualities
CST 200A (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.
Studies of sexuality in feminist, literary, historical, and cultural studies research, specifically examining the emergence of "sexuality" as a field of research and the relationship of sexuality studies to cultural forms, subjectivity, and social relations generally.
CST 206
Studies in Race Theory
CST 200A (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.
Theoretical framework for the critical study of race, drawing on contemporary cultural studies and postcolonial scholarship in order to understand the social production of "race" as a category for organizing social groups and determining group processes.
CST 208
Studies in Nationalism, Transnationalism, & Late Capitalism
CST 200A (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.
Contemporary theories of nation, nationalism, postcolonialism, and transnationalism. Specific attention to the relationship between cultural production and the formation of ideas about nation and nationalism, including examination of both "legitimizing" and resistant discourses. 
CST 210
Memory, Culture, & Human Rights
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.Restricted to graduate students.
Explores the multiple convergences among memory, culture, and human rights. Discusses diverse approaches to how societal actors in different historical, cultural, and national settings, construct meanings of past political violence, inter-group conflicts, and human rights struggles.
CST 212
Studies in the Rhetorics of Culture
CST 200A (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.
Survey of critical and analytical approaches to the study of texts.  Examination of multi-mediated objects to understand their cultural import by focusing on discursive production, dispersal, and reception processes, and related shifts in power relations.
CST 214
Studies in Political & Cultural Representations
CST 200A (can be concurrent);  Consent of graduate advisor required.
Framework for the analysis of political and popular cultural representations.  Emphasis on concepts, theories, and methodologies illuminating dominant and vernacular cultural representation, appropriation, and innovation in transnational contexts.  
CST 250
Research Seminar
CST 200A;  CST 200B;  CST 200C;  or Consent of Instructor.
Designed to facilitate student interaction and promote student research by guiding students through the production of a publishable essay.  Essays submitted, distributed, and discussed by seminar participants.
CST 270A
Individually Guided Research in Cultural Studies
CST 200C;  CST 250;  and Consent of Instructor.
Individually guided research, under the supervision of a faculty member, on a Cultural Studies topic related to the student's proposed dissertation project to produce a dissertation prospectus.
CST 270B
Individually Guided Research in Cultural Studies
CST 200C;  CST 250;  and Consent of Instructor.
Individually guided research, under the supervision of a faculty member, on a Cultural Studies topic related to the student's proposed dissertation project to produce a dissertation prospectus.
CST 270C
Individually Guided Research in Cultural Studies
CST 200C;  CST 250;  and Consent of Instructor.
Individually guided research, under the supervision of a faculty member, on a Cultural Studies topic related to the student's proposed dissertation project to produce a dissertation prospectus.
CST 290
Colloquium
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Designed to provide cohort identity and faculty student exchange.  Opportunity to present papers, hear guest lecturers, and see faculty presentations, gather for organizational and administrative news, exchange information, and make announcements.
CST 295
Special Topics
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Special topics courses offered according to faculty and student interests and demands.
CST 299D
Dissertation Research
Advancement to doctoral candidacy.

CST 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Graduate standing.

CTS 040B
Media History 2 1945-Present
CTS 040A.
History of media from 1945 to present, with particular focus on the development of the computer, digital network and internet technologies in the context of other media infrastructures like radio, television and satellite networks.  Analysis of inter-related cultural/political topics.
CTS 124E
Costume Design for Film
DRA 024;  or Consent of Instructor.Pass One restricted to Theatre & Dance majors.
Theory and practice of the art and business of film costume design. Script analysis, costume research, developing design concepts, budgeting, and current production practices and methods. Execution of designs for period and contemporary films. Viewing of current films.
CTS 146A
Modern Iranian Cinema  
Upper division standing, or consent of instructor.
Iranian cinema of the 20th century in the context of profound cultural and social changes in Iran especially since the Iranian Revolution. Productions by representative directors such as Kiarostami, Makhmalbaf, Bahram Beizaie are included. Knowledge of Persian not required.  
CTS 146B
Modern South Asia Cinema
Upper division standing or consent of instructor.
South Asian cinema of last 100 years in the context of cultural, social, and political changes. South Asian history, Independence, Partition, urban life, class, migration, postcolonial identity, diaspora, gender, sexuality, religion, sport, performance, etc.
CTS 147A
Chinese Film
HIS 009A;  Or any course on traditional China; upper division standing.
English language survey of Chinese film, from its inception to the end of the 20th century. Chinese films as important texts for understanding national, transnational, racial, gender, and class politics of modern China.
CTS 162
Surveillance Technologies & Social Media
TCS 001 or STS 020.
Study of the ubiquitous presence of CCTV, face recognition software, global tracking systems, biosensors, and data mining practices that have made surveillance part of our daily life.  Study boundaries between security and control, information and spying.
CTS 172
Video Games & Culture
TCS 001 or ENL 003 or STS 001;  or equivalent of these courses.
Critical approaches to the study of video games, focusing on formal, historical, and cultural modes of analysis. History of software and hardware in North American and global contexts. Relations of games to society, politics, economics, literature, media, and the arts.
CTS 174
Acting for Camera
Consent of Instructor.
Analysis and practice of acting skills required for camera work and digital media.
DEB 263
Biotechnology Fundamentals & Application
BIS 101;  BIS 102;  MIC 102;  or Consent of Instructor.  Must be a graduate student in good standing.
Fundamentals of molecular biology and chemical engineering involved in recombinant DNA technology. Topics: principles of rate processes of biological systems, optimization of bioreactors, and issues related to overexpression and production of recombinant molecules. Participation in student-directed team projects.
DEB 282
Biotechnology Internship
Graduate standing and Consent of Instructor.Open only to students participating in the Designated Emphasis in Biotechnology program.
Research at a biotechnology company or interdisciplinary cross-college lab for a minimum of three months as part of the Designated Emphasis in Biotechnology Program.
DEB 294
Current Progress in Biotechnology
Graduate standing.
Seminars presented by guest lecturers on subjects of their own research activities. 
DER 192
Internship in Cutaneous Biology
Upper division standing or consent of instructor.
Approval of project prior to internship by preceptor. Supervised work experience involving research on the skin. Final report.
DER 199
Special Study in Cutaneous Biology
Advanced undergraduate standing and/or consent of instructor.
Special study by individual arrangement of specialized topics in biology of skin. Work may be assigned readings, laboratory research or a combination.
DER 299
Research in Cutaneous Biology
Consent of Instructor.
Independent research in cellular and biochemical mechanisms of cutaneous biology and pathology.
DER 420
Integumentary System
Approval of School of Medicine Committee on Student Promotions.Restricted to Medical students only; student must have passed all SOM Year 1 courses.
Cell biology, pathology, and physical diagnosis of the skin. Recognition of normal variations, and common or important dermatoses. Patient demonstrations of select conditions.
DER 460
Dermatology Clinical Clerkship
Completion of three years of medical school; or consent of instructor.Limited enrollment.
Observation and participation in dermatology clinics/practice and participation in Ward Rounds and Dermatology Clinics at UC Davis Medical Center, Kaiser, and private practitioner offices. 
DER 465
Specialty Externship in Dermatology
Consent of Instructor.
Externship provides in-depth exposure to one of a variety of sub-specialties in Dermatology.
DER 466
Away Acting Internship in Dermatology
Consent of Instructor.
Work at the level of a sub intern in Inpatient and/or Outpatient settings. Expectation is to provide direct patient management.
DER 470
Introduction to Dermatopathology 
Consent of Instructor.  Previous rotation in a Dermatology Clerkship.Restricted to fourth-year medical student.
Integrated, multi-specialty approach to the microscopic diagnosis of inflammatory and neoplastic skin disorders. 
DER 480
Insights in Dermatology
Consent of Instructor.  First- and second- year medical students in good academic standing.
Clinical experience limited to observation of delivery of dermatologic care and attendance at some conferences.
DER 495
Wound Healing: From Bench to Bedside
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to medical students only.
An integrated, multi-specialty approach to clinical soft tissue wound healing.
DER 498
Special Topics in Clinical Dermatology
Medical students with consent of instructor.
Individually arranged study of special topics in clinical dermatologydetermined by student and instructor. Assigned readings and/or clinical examination of selected patients.
DER 499
Research in Cutaneous Biology
Consent of Instructor.
Research, either laboratory or clinical, on ongoing projects within the department under supervision of faculty.
DES 014
Design Drawing
DES 001 (can be concurrent);  students with a background in drawing or Advanced Placement Art Studio units are encouraged to submit a portfolio for review to waive this course.Priority given to Design majors.
Drawing as a tool for design. Basic skills in objective observation and representation, including line, shape, tone, and space. Drawing as a tool for formulating and working through design problems.
DES 015
Form & Color
DES 001 (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.Priority given to Design majors. 
Understanding color, form and composition as ways of communicating design concepts and content. Color theory, color mixing, interaction of color. Design principles and elements. Gestalt theory. Explores a variety of materials, media and presentation techniques.
DES 016
Graphic Design & Computer Technology
DES 001 (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.Priority given to Design majors.
Introduction to digital tools with emphasis on graphic design including theory, practice and technology. Includes principles of color, resolution, pixels, vectors, image enhancement, layout, visual organization, visual hierarchy, typography. 
DES 021
Drafting & Perspective
DES 001 (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.Priority given to Design majors.
Introduction to mechanical drafting, including scaled drawing, orthogonal projection, isometric, axonometric and perspective. Includes basic rendering techniques.
DES 050
Introduction to Three-Dimensional Design
DES 001;  or Consent of Instructor.Priority given to Design majors.
Design concept development and detailing as it relates to the making of objects, structures and models using form, scale and materials. Product design and rapid prototyping methods using a range of techniques for advancing the design process.
DES 051
Computer-Assisted Drawing for Designers
DES 001 (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.
Computer-assisted drawing (CAD) and modeling using a mid-level, multi-use CAD program. Basic architectural drawing and modeling technique in both two-dimensional and three-dimensional CAD environments.
DES 070
Introduction to Textile Design Structures
DES 001 (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.Priority to Design majors.  
Introduction to diverse methods for creating textile structures. Exploration of the creative potential of hand-constructed textiles, manipulation of fabric to create dimensional surfaces, and the basics of building and joining fabric structures.
DES 077
Introduction to Structural Design for Fashion
DES 001 (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.Priority given to Design majors.  
Study and practice of designing clothing for the human body. Emphasis on flat pattern development, structural joining sequences and the development of three-dimensional garments from two-dimensional drawings.
DES 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

DES 107
Advanced Structural Design for Fashion
DES 001;  (DES 014 or DES 021);  DES 015;  DES 016;  DES 077;  or Consent of Instructor.Priority given to Design majors.  	
Advanced study and practice of designing clothing for the human body through pattern development and structural joining. Emphasis on draping techniques and advanced conceptualization for fashion design.
DES 111
Coding for Designers
DES 001;  DES 015;  DES 016;  or Consent of Instructor.Pass One restricted to Design majors.
Programming concepts/skills for design. Algorithm-based design and development flowcharts. Pseudo-code entry level programming. Principles of coding logic syntax structure. Analysis of history. Development iteration presentation of design projects. 
DES 112
UI/UX Design: Principles & Practices
DES 001;  (DES 014 or DES 021);  DES 015;  DES 016.Pass One restricted to Design Majors.
Conceptual approaches, technical practice for interactive media using the front-end stack (html, css, js). Conceptual framework, user experience, visual interface and interaction design. Research and written pre-production materials required.
DES 113
Photography & Digital Imaging
DES 001;  DES 015;  DES 016.Pass One restricted to Design majors.
Digital imaging techniques using black/white and color. Critical analysis of photographs and the role of photography in society. Explore use and meaning of single, sequence and single composite images.
DES 115
Letterforms & Typography
DES 001;  (DES 014 or DES 021);  DES 015;  DES 016;  or Consent of Instructor.Priority given to Design majors.
Fundamentals of letterforms and typography. Characteristics of typefaces; formatting and composition of type. Principles of legibility, visual hierarchy, grid systems, and the integration of type and image.
DES 116
Visual Communication: Graphic Design Studio
DES 001;  (DES 014 or DES 021);  DES 015;  DES 016;  DES 115;  or Consent of Instructor.Priority given to Design majors.
Multiple, conceptually-linked assignments focusing on the fundamental choices designers make in translating concepts into effective graphic form. Problem finding and analysis of audience needs. Design process from research and initial concepts to project prototypes. May be taught abroad.
DES 117
Interactive Media I 
DES 001;  (DES 014 or DES 021);  DES 015;  DES 016;  or Consent of Instructor.Priority to Design majors. 
Practice of creating interactive visual media for network-based applications and principles of human computer interaction. Responsive design. User-centered research, information architecture, interface and interaction. Analysis of usability. Development and presentation of design production materials and completed interactive projects.
DES 126
Design Ethnography
DES 001;  or Consent of Instructor.Pass One restricted to Design majors.
Practical introduction to design ethnography through project-based work. Tools and methods, observation, interviews, fieldnotes, and synthesis of qualitative data. Exploration of participatory design. Examination of the ethical questions.
DES 127A
Sustainable Design
DES 001.Priority to Design majors. 
Principles, practice and materials of contemporary sustainable design in the context of environmental crisis. History of sustainable design in relation to the fields of textiles, visual communication, interior architecture, exhibition design and lighting.  
DES 127A
Sustainable Design
DES 001.Pass One open to Design Majors.
Principles, practice and materials of contemporary sustainable design in the context of environmental crisis. History of sustainable design in relation to the fields of product design, material science, energy, architecture, and transportation. 
DES 127B
Studio Practice in Sustainable Design
DES 127A;  DES 001;  or Consent of Instructor.Priority to Design majors.
Analysis and practice of sustainable design within studio context. Design project that incorporate the reuse of post consumer waste; standard materials vs. sustainable materials; Cradle to Cradle philosophy and practice. Field trips required.
DES 131
Global Fashion & Product Design
DES 001;  (DES 014 or DES 021);  DES 015;  DES 016;  or Consent of Instructor.Priority given to Design majors.
Exploration of materials, embellishments, and structural techniques derived from historic and contemporary world cultures. Emphasis on unique qualities of individual expression applied to hand made textiles, fashion and textile products. May be taught abroad.
DES 132A
Textile Design: Woven Structures
DES 001;  (DES 014 or DES 021);  DES 015;  DES 016;  or Consent of Instructor.Priority given to Design majors. 
Foundation in handwoven textile structure and design, emphasizing yarn identification, basic drafting, basic weaves and their derivatives explored in context of original color effects and yarn combinations.
DES 132B
Loom-Constructed Textile Design
DES 001;  (DES 014 or DES 021);  DES 015;  DES 016;  DES 132A;  or Consent of Instructor.Priority to Design majors.
Intermediate level study of complex fabric structure with emphasis on pattern in relation to surface, dimension, and material.
DES 134A
Introduction to Interior Design - Residential
DES 001;  (DES 021 or DES 150A);  or Consent of Instructor.Priority to Design majors.
Introduction to the theory and practice of interior design with focus on residential spaces. Basic methods of design conceptualization, development, and presentation.
DES 134B
Introduction to Interior Design - Commercial & Technical Spaces
DES 001;  (DES 021 or DES 150A);  or Consent of Instructor.Pass One priority given to Design majors.
Introduction to the theory and practice of interior design with focus on small commercial and technical spaces. Archetypal spaces, non-residential building systems, ADA accessibility, design programming and research methods.
DES 135A
Furniture Design & Detailing
DES 001;  (DES 014 or DES 021);  DES 015;  DES 016;  or Consent of Instructor.Priority given to Design majors.
Development of designs for contemporary furniture. Consideration of behavioral and physical requirements, cultural and historic expression, and structural and aesthetic qualities. Process includes research, drawings, and construction of scale models. Required field trip. 
DES 135B
Furniture Design & Prototyping 
DES 001;  (DES 014 or DES 021);  DES 015;  DES 016;  or Consent of Instructor.Priority given to Design majors. 
Design and construction of full size prototype furniture based on preliminary work completed in DES 135A. Material technology, construction methods, and finishes discussed. Development of shop drawings and furniture construction. Required field trip.
DES 136A
Lighting Technology & Design
DES 001;  (DES 014 or DES 021);  DES 015;  DES 016;  or Consent of Instructor.Priority to Design majors.  
Introduction to lighting design and technology. Understanding the role of lighting and vision in the development of functional and aesthetically pleasing environments.  
DES 136B
Designing with Light - Industrial Design 
DES 001;  (DES 014 or DES 021);  DES 015;  DES 016;  DES 136A;  or Consent of Instructor.Priority to Design majors.  
Design and manipulation of light sources, luminaires, and lighting controls to enhance the functional and aesthetic impact of interior and exterior spaces.  Industrial design projects explore lighting effects, light distribution characteristics, and luminaire design.
DES 137A
Daylighting & Interior Design
DES 001;  (DES 014 or DES 021);  DES 015;  DES 016;  or Consent of Instructor.Priority to Design majors.
Emphasis on understanding the effect of daylight on the perception of interior designs as well as on vision, luminous and thermal comfort, health and energy efficiency.
DES 137B
Daylighting Design Studio
DES 001;  (DES 014 or DES 021);  DES 015;  DES 016;  or Consent of Instructor.Priority to Design majors. 
Introduction to daylighting through observation of its effects on interior designs using scale models of interior designs of choice and photographing them outdoors and in CLTCs Heliodon to understand year-round performance.
DES 138
Materials & Methods in Interior Design
DES 001;  or Consent of Instructor.Priority to Design majors. 
Introduction to the finish materials used for interior design with special emphasis on sustainable and recycled products. Performance factors, relative costs and energy impacts, installation conditions and construction details, and design potential for a full range of interior materials.  
DES 144
History of Interior Architecture
Consent of Instructor.Pass One priority to Design majors.
Thematic survey of interior architecture. Emphasis on dwellings in their cultural settings and development of modern interior design theories. Interiors considered in relation to buildings' exteriors, sites, and uses.
DES 145
History of Visual Communication
DES 001;  or Consent of Instructor.Priority to Design majors.
Historical developments of visual communication, concentrating on the technological and aesthetic development of graphic design; origins and manifestations of current issues in visual communication; provide framework for analysis of current and future trends in visual communication.
DES 149
Information Design: Principles & Practice
Upper division standing or consent of instructor.Restricted to students with upper division standing. 
Design principles and visual strategies for effective information display; analysis of contemporary and historical examples of visual representations and visual narratives in science, humanities, and the arts; emergence of digital methods for interactive data presentation.
DES 150A
Computer-Assisted Drawing for Designers
DES 001;  (DES 014 or DES 021);  DES 015;  DES 016;  or Consent of Instructor.  DES 021 preferred.Priority given to Design majors.
Computer assisted drawing and modeling using a mid-level, multi-use CAD program. Basic architectural drawing and modeling technique in both two-dimensional and three-dimensional CAD environments.
DES 150A
Computer-Assisted Drawing for Designers
DES 001;  (DES 014 or DES 021);  DES 015;  DES 016;  or Consent of Instructor.  DES 021 preferred.Priority given to Design majors.
Computer assisted drawing and modeling using a mid-level, multi-use CAD program. Basic architectural drawing and modeling technique in both two-dimensional and three-dimensional CAD environments.
DES 150B
Computer-Assisted Presentations for Interior Architecture
DES 001;  (DES 014 or DES 021);  DES 015;  DES 016;  DES 150A;  or Consent of Instructor.  DES 021 recommended.Priority given to Design majors.
Computer-assisted architectural presentation including the development of complex 3D models, techniques of photo-realistic rendering and computer simulation of movement through architectural and interior space.
DES 151
Type in Motion
DES 001;  (DES 014 or DES 021);  DES 015;  DES 016;  or Consent of Instructor.  DES 115 recommended.Priority given to Design majors.
Fundamentals of creating motion-based, screen-based typography.  Consideration of narrative structures, movement assemblage, and other visual languages, synthesized within a nuanced understanding of typography within digital space. May be taught abroad.
DES 154
Visual Communication: Message Campaign Design
DES 115;  DES 116;  DES 001;  (DES 014 or DES 021);  DES 015;  DES 016;  or Consent of Instructor.Priority given to Design majors.
Principles and application of visual design strategies for projects that address a broad public audience. Emphasis on design for social awareness/interaction/benefit. Creation of public visual-media campaign.
DES 155A
Pattern, Form & Surface
DES 001;  DES 115;  (DES 014 or DES 021);  DES 015;  DES 016;  (DES 031 or DES 113);  or Consent of Instructor.Priority given to Design majors.
Experimental approaches to form-making through an examination of pattern, form, and surface in historical and contemporary contexts. Explorations of alternative design processes, methods, and materials that open up new possibilities for content creation and invention in design practice.
DES 156
Graphitecture: Architecture in the Age of New Media
DES 001;  DES 014;  DES 015;  DES 016.Priority to Design majors.
New media and its impact on environmental design; analysis of contemporary projects at the intersection of architecture and new media; time-based strategies of representation; digital narrative.
DES 156
Graphitecture: Architecture in the Age of New Media
DES 001;  (DES 014 or DES 021);  DES 015;  DES 016.Priority to Design majors.
New media and its impact on environmental design; analysis of contemporary projects at the intersection of architecture and new media; time-based strategies of representation; digital narrative.
DES 157
Interactive Media II 
DES 001;  (DES 014 or DES 021);  DES 015;  DES 016;  (DES 037 or DES 111);  DES 117;  or Consent of Instructor.Priority to Design majors.
Conceptual approaches, technical practice for interactive media using the front-end stack (html, css, js). Conceptual framework, user experience, visual interface and interaction design. Research and written pre-production materials required.
DES 159
Design for Understanding
DES 001;  (DES 014 or DES 021);  DES 015;  DES 016;  DES 115;  DES 116;  or Consent of Instructor.  DES 117 recommended.Pass One open to Design majors.
Principles of effective information display including aspects of language, structure, legibility, sequencing, and context. Analysis of historical examples of typographic, diagrammatic, and cartographic excellence. User-centered research. Development and presentation of iterative design prototypes. Design that informs, connects, and inspires. 
DES 160
Textile Surface Design: Patterns & Resists
DES 001;  (DES 014 or DES 021);  DES 015;  or Consent of Instructor.Pass one restricted to Design majors.
Use of traditional and contemporary processes to create images and patterns on fabric using a variety of dyes, including direct applications, bound and mechanical resists, and surface additives. 
DES 161
Textile Surface Design: Screen & Digital Printing
DES 001;  (DES 014 or DES 021);  DES 015;  DES 016.Pass One restricted to Design majors.
Design of textiles and screen printing on fabrics; soft-product development; integration of hand-produced and digitally generated imagery on cloth.
DES 165
Studio Practices in Industrial Design
DES 001;  (DES 014 or DES 021);  DES 015;  DES 050;  or Consent of Instructor.Pass One restricted to Design majors.
3D studio methods for design, including: historic and contemporary developments in industrial design; innovation in material and fabrication technology; design based projects for everyday objects including soft goods, electronics, transportation. 
DES 166
Human Centered Design
DES 001;  DES 014;  DES 015.Pass One restricted to Design majors.
Human-centered approach to problem solving, ethnography, ideation, project framing, rapid prototypes, visual communication, and experiential learning. Creative approaches to graphic design, industrial design, fashion, business, and entrepreneurship. 
DES 166
Human Centered Design
DES 001;  (DES 014 or DES 021);  DES 015.Pass One restricted to Design majors.
Human-centered approach to problem solving, ethnography, ideation, project framing, rapid prototypes, visual communication, and experiential learning. Creative approaches to graphic design, industrial design, fashion, business, and entrepreneurship. 
DES 167
Prototyping: From Objects to Systems
DES 001;  (DES 014 or DES 021);  DES 015;  or Consent of Instructor.Pass One restricted to Design majors.
Exploration of rapid prototyping techniques for objects, interactive experiences, services and organizations. Understanding of additive manufacturing, foam models, digital interfaces and business models.  
DES 169
Advanced Explorations in Textile Design
DES 001;  DES 014 or DES 021;  DES 015;  DES 016;  DES 160 or DES 161;  or Consent of Instructor.  DES 070 recommended.Pass One restricted to Design majors.
Advanced exploration of textile design aimed at developing unique textiles for a specific end product such as a fashion collection, functional interior design, art textile or surface design competition. 
DES 170
Experimental Fashion & Textile Design
DES 001;  (DES 014 or DES 021);  DES 015;  DES 016;  or Consent of Instructor.Priority to Design majors. 
Experimental approaches to fashion and textile design. Emphasis on developing conceptual ideas and translating them into one-of-a-kind garments and soft products. Exploration of a variety of current topics including sustainability, pattern design, new technologies, and social activism.
DES 171
Fashion Drawing: Technical & Illustration
DES 001;  (DES 014 or DES 021);  DES 015;  DES 016;  or Consent of Instructor.  DES 014 recommended.Priority to Design majors.
Exploration of fashion design processes for industry within the social and physical context. Emphasis on two-dimensional conceptualization of ideas, garment construction, and ideation processes utilizing commercial textiles. Field trip required.
DES 177
Computer-Assisted Fashion Design
DES 077;  DES 001;  (DES 014 or DES 021);  DES 015;  DES 016;  or Consent of Instructor.Priority to Design majors. 
Advanced exploration of apparel design processes for industry and personal expression with emphasis on computer-assisted design applications. Field trip required. 
DES 178
Design and Wearable Technology
DES 001;  DES 014;  DES 015;  DES 016;  (DES 037 or DES 111);  or Consent of Instructor.Pass One restricted to Design majors.
Introduction to wearable technology and related technologies. Emphasis on designing, and fabricating prototypes of wearable technology for value-added designs and to improve quality of life.
DES 178
Design & Wearable Technology
DES 001;  (DES 014 or DES 021);  DES 015;  DES 016;  (DES 037 or DES 111);  or Consent of Instructor.Pass One restricted to Design majors.
Introduction to wearable technology and related technologies. Emphasis on designing, and fabricating prototypes of wearable technology for value-added designs and to improve quality of life.
DES 179
Fashion Design: Signature Collection
DES 077;  (DES 107 or DES 177);  DES 001;  (DES 014 or DES 021);  DES 015;  DES 016;  or Consent of Instructor.Priority to Design majors.
Advanced exploration of fashion design with an emphasis on professional portfolio development and presentation. Emphasis on conceptualizing, designing, and fabricating a cohesive line of wearable garments suitable for presenting in a public fashion show. 
DES 180A
Advanced Interior Design: Institutional Spaces
DES 001;  (DES 021 or DES 150A);  or Consent of Instructor.Priority to Design majors.
Advanced interior design problems focused on complex institutional spaces. Introduction to building codes related to interior design. Integration of building systems with interior design solutions.
DES 180B
Advanced Interior Architecture
(DES 180A or DES 134B);  DES 134A;  or Consent of Instructor.Priority to Design majors.
Advanced problems in interior architectural design emphasizing space planning for corporate and institutional environments. Field trips required.
DES 185
Exhibition Design
DES 001;  (DES 014 or DES 021);  DES 015;  DES 016;  or Consent of Instructor.  DES 150A recommended.Priority to Design majors.
Design of cultural and commercial exhibition environments, including exhibition development and object selection, spatial planning and architectural finishes, object placement and staging, interpretive strategies, exhibition and promotional graphics.
DES 186
Environmental Graphic Design
DES 001;  (DES 014 or DES 021);  DES 015;  DES 016;  or Consent of Instructor.  DES 115 recommended.Priority to Design majors.
Design of informational and directional graphics for the built environment. Application and integration of typography, imagery and symbols into the architectural landscape. Development of universal wayfinding and graphic navigational systems to help people find their way. 
DES 187
Narrative Environments
(DES 185 or DES 186);  (DES 014 or DES 021);  DES 001;  DES 015;  DES 016;  or Consent of Instructor.Priority to Design majors.
Design of storytelling environments and multi-sensory experiences for cultural, commercial, entertainment and public spaces. Interpretive planning and design for specific exhibit audiences. Manipulation of objects and the communication of complex ideas in the exhibition environment. May be taught abroad.
DES 190
Proseminar
Design major or consent of instructor.
Philosophies of design explored through discussion and presentation of research results.
DES 191A
Workshops in Design
DES 014;  DES 015;  and Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Faculty initiated workshops featuring advanced studies and applications of original work in Design: Costume. Letter grading by contract. Field trips included.
DES 191B
Workshops in Design
DES 014;  DES 015;  and Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Faculty initiated workshops featuring advanced studies and applications of original work in Design: Environment. Letter grading by contract. Field trips included.
DES 191C
Workshops in Design
DES 014;  DES 015;  and Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Faculty initiated workshops featuring advanced studies and applications of original work in Design: Graphics. Letter grading by contract. Field trips included.
DES 191D
Workshops in Design
DES 014;  DES 015;  and Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Faculty initiated workshops featuring advanced studies and applications of original work in Design: Textiles. Letter grading by contract. Field trips included.
DES 192
Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of 84 units.Enrollment limited to 3 units per quarter or 6 units per IV session.
Supervised internship, off and on campus, in areas of design includingenvironmental, costume, textile, museum, display and interior design. 
DES 194HA
Special Study for Honors Students
Consent of Instructor.  Qualification for Letters and Science Honors Program; senior standing; approval of Design Honors Program proposal by the Curriculum Committee and major advisor.Limited enrollment.
Preparation and presentation of a culminating project. Supervision of an instructor in one of the creative or scholarly areas of Design.
DES 194HB
Special Study for Honors Students
DES 194HA;  and Consent of Instructor.  Qualification for Letters and Science Honors Program; senior standing.Limited enrollment.
Preparation and presentation of a culminating project. Supervision of an instructor in one of the creative or scholarly areas of Design.
DES 197T
Tutoring in Design
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Leading of small discussion groups or studio meetings affiliated with one of the department's regular courses.
DES 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.
DES 199FA
Student Facilitated Course Development
Consent of Instructor.
Planning and development for student led DES 198F under the supervision of a faculty member.
DES 199FB
Student Facilitated Teaching
DES 199FA;  and Consent of Instructor.
Student-facilitated course under the supervision of a faculty member, an undergraduate student teaching a course under 098F/198F.
DES 221
Theory & Issues in Design
Graduate standing in Design or consent of instructor.
Perspectives on theoretical and aesthetic issues related to the design professions such as methodology in historical and contemporary contexts, implications of technology on design theory and practice, and design relationships to environmental sustainability, recycling, and other social issues.
DES 222
Research Methods & Critical Writing for Design
DES 221;  Graduate standing in Design or consent of instructor.
Focused on research methods and critical writing related to design topics including case studies, original and secondary sources, critical reviews. Expectation of a paper meeting professional standards suitable for publication from each student at end of course.
DES 223
Profesional Practice & Ethics in Design
DES 221;  DES 222;  Graduate standing in Design or consent of instructor.
Introduce students to issues of professional design practice: business ethics, contracts and business practices, social responsibility through case studies, guest lectures and field trips, and readings. Short written assignments and presentations will be required.
DES 224
Seminar in Design Research & Teaching
DES 221;  DES 222;  DES 223;  and Consent of Instructor.  Concurrent academic appointment (TA) in DES 142A, DES 142B, DES 143, DES 144, DES 145; graduate standing in Design.
Work closely with instructor on a research and writing project related to subject matter of undergraduate history courses noted above with the goal of introducing student to advanced historical research processes and development of writing skills.   
DES 225
Studio Practice in Design
DES 221.Restricted to graduate standing in Design or consent of instructor.
Students work together on a collective project to experience the multiple phases of design through an iterative process. Design projects will be geared towards relevance in contemporary social, cultural and political contexts.
DES 290
Seminar in Design
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Selected topics in design methodology, research, communication, and education.
DES 292
Practicum in Design
Graduate standing in Design or consent of instructor.
Interaction with a working professional in the student's field of interest to apply theories and concepts to working practice.
DES 298
Directed Group Study for Graduate Students
Consent of Instructor.

DES 299
Individual Focused Study
Graduate standing in Design or consent of instructor.
Advanced study in studio practice on independent projects with faculty consultation.
DES 299D
Project Concentration
Graduate standing in Design or consent of instructor; minimum of 22 units must be taken in Project Concentration and Individual Focused Study.
Student creates a body of original work at a professional level, withwritten and visual documentation of process and concepts underlying the project, culminating in public presentation.
DES 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Graduate standing.

DRA 030
Theatre Laboratory
Consent of Instructor.
Projects in acting, production, scene design, costuming, lighting, directing, and playwriting. Participation in departmental productions.  
DRA 040B
Intermediate Modern Dance
DRA 040A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Modern dance techniques. Basic anatomy, dance terminology and a general overview of modern dance history.
DRA 041B
Intermediate Jazz Dance
DRA 041A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Warm-ups, dance techniques and combinations at the intermediate level. Basic anatomy, dance terminology and a general overview of jazz styles of historically significant jazz choreographers and leading contemporary jazz choreographers. 
DRA 042B
Intermediate Ballet
DRA 042A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Barre and center work at the intermediate level. Development andrefinement of technique through proper alignment, rhythmic, and qualitative understanding. Anatomy, ballet terminology, and dance history. 
DRA 043B
Intermediate Contact Improvisation
DRA 043A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Building on the fundamentals. Reviewing basics, extended improvising, skillfully working with partners of different sizes and abilities, advanced lifting, advanced safety practices, embracing risk and disorientation, subtle nuances of communication.
DRA 044B
Intermediate Hip Hop Dance
DRA 044A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Expansion of Hip Hop dance vocabulary by focusing on mastering body isolations and intricate rhythmic techniques, complex dance combinations, advanced across the floor sequences.
DRA 092
Internship in Dramatic Art
Consent of instructor and department chairperson.Restricted to lower division students with less than 84 units completed.
Internship outside the Department of Theatre & Dance enabling students to practice their skills.
DRA 114
Theatre on Film
Consent of Instructor.
Study of six/eight plays on film, using mixed casts and raising issues of diversity. Focus: sociohistorical context for production and reception, interpretation and analysis of topics (gender, ethnicity, age, politics, philosophy), and filming, screenwriting, design, and acting/directing for film.
DRA 120
Intermediate Acting/Gateway: The Actor's Toolkit
DRA 021A;  or Consent of Instructor.Limited enrollment.
Implementation of acting tools drawn predominantly from Stanislavskys system. Gateway into the Advanced Acting courses.
DRA 121A
Advanced Acting: Scene Study & Script Analysis
DRA 120;  and Consent of Instructor.Limited enrollment.
In-depth study, analysis and performance of texts from different eras, genres and styles. Implementation of tools to undertake independent preparation of character creation.
DRA 121B
Advanced Acting: Rehearsal Processes & Practices
DRA 120;  and Consent of Instructor.Limited enrollment.
Development of rehearsal practice and etiquette, using a variety of scenes from different eras and genres. Established to enable visiting artists in residence to undertake the instruction, as well as faculty.
DRA 121C
Advanced Acting: Character & Style
DRA 120;  and Consent of Instructor.Limited enrollment.
Study of psycho-physical techniques to create characters with an emphasis on non-realistic styles.
DRA 122A
Advanced Acting: Devising & Collaboration
DRA 120;  and Consent of Instructor.Limited enrollment.
Study and practice of various devising techniques, to collaborate on and produce a series of short etudes and dramatic scenes/short plays.
DRA 122B
Advanced Acting: Shakespeare & His Contemporaries
DRA 120;  and Consent of Instructor.Limited enrollment.
Study and performance of classical texts (monologues and dialogues), with a focus on Shakespeare and the Elizabethan world view. 
DRA 122C
Advanced Acting: Special Topics in Acting
DRA 120;  and Consent of Instructor.Restricted to Theatre & Dance majors; limited enrollment.
Intensive study and practical exploration of a specialized area; for example, World Theatre, Social Theatre, Physical Theatre, Musical Theatre, the Ancient Greeks, etc. 
DRA 124A
Principles of Theatrical Design: Scenery
Consent of Instructor.upper division standing; Pass One restricted to Theatre & Dance majors. 
Scene design processes, working drawings, sketching techniques, scale models, methods and materials of scenery construction.
DRA 124B
Principles of Theatrical Design: Scenery
Consent of Instructor.Upper division standing; Pass One restricted to Theatre & Dance majors.
Analysis of plays in terms of scene design, elements of design, execution of designs for modern and period plays.
DRA 124C
Principles of Theatrical Design: Lighting
Consent of Instructor.Upper division standing; Pass One restricted to Theatre & Dance majors.
Theories of lighting the stage, equipment and control systems, execution of lighting plots.
DRA 124D
Principles of Theatrical Design: Costume
upper division standing or consent of instructor.Upper division standing; Pass One restricted to Theatre & Dance majors.
Source materials for theatrical costuming, selecting fabrics, elements of design, analysis of plays in terms of costume design, execution of designs for modern and period plays.
DRA 124E
Costume Design for Film
Consent of Instructor.Pass One restricted to Theatre & Dance majors.
Theory and practice of the art and business of film costume design. Script analysis, costume research, developing design concepts, budgeting, and current production practices and methods. Execution of designs for period and contemporary films. Viewing of current films.
DRA 125
Scenic Painting: Studio
DRA 024 or DRA 028;  or Consent of Instructor.  upper division standing in Theatre & Dance, Art Studio, or Design.
Scene painting techniques, practices and materials including color mixing and matching, wood graining, faux painting techniques, glazing, creating foliage, stone and brick.
DRA 127A
Principles of Directing
Consent of Instructor.
Director's creative approach to the play and to its staging.
DRA 127B
Principles of Directing
DRA 127A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Director's creative approach to the actor.
DRA 130
Approaches to Theatrical Design: Practice & Theory
DRA 124A or DRA 124B or DRA 124C or DRA 124D or DRA 124E;  Upper division standing in Theatre & Dance, Art Studio or Design; or consent of instructor.
Advanced design study in specific areas including but not limited to: research, design styles and concepts, new materials and techniques, scenery, lighting, costume, makeup, photography, projections, computer technology, spectacle and special effects, and alternative theatre forms and genres.
DRA 135
Voice in Performance
DRA 021B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Progression of exercises to free, develop and strengthen the voice, as a human and then as an actor's instrument with emphasis on how the voice works, to freeing the channel for sound, to interpersonal communication. 
DRA 140A
Dance Composition 
DRA 040A or DRA 041A or DRA 042A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Introduction to the craft of choreography. Compose phrases and present movement studies based on the elements of choreography: motivation, space, time, force/energy.
DRA 140B
Dance Composition 
DRA 140A.
Continuation of the study of choreography, focusing on the development of group choreography: duets, trios, quartets and group work, form, and accompaniment.
DRA 140C
Dance Composition 
DRA 140A;  DRA 140B.
Continuation of study of choreography focusing on sequencing movements for groups. The relation between dance and allied mediums of music, sets, costumes and lighting. Students conceptualize a choreographic issue and explore it through creation of short dance studies.
DRA 143
Dance & Movement Studio
Consent of Instructor.
Special studies in dance and movement such as African, Balinese, Baroque, Chinese, European, and stage combat. Offered as needed for stage productions.
DRA 144B
Traditional Chinese Physical Culture
DRA 144A.
Traditional Chinese Wushu practices, explored through practical work in dance laboratory conditions. Integration of practice with conceptual analysis; contemporary social, educational and artistic applications.
DRA 144C
Daoist Philosophy in Traditional Chinese Movement Culture
DRA 144B.
Daoist practices of movement and their relation to daoist philosophy, explored through work in dance laboratory conditions. Integration of practice with conceptual analysis, and critical philosophy around values and ethical action.
DRA 145
Directed Choreography Projects
DRA 140A;  DRA 140B;  DRA 140C;  or Consent of Instructor.
Conceptualization, creation, casting, rehearsing, and concert presentation of complete dances, with students integrating elements of stagecraft and directing the on-stage rehearsals.
DRA 145
Directed Choreography Projects
DRA 140A or DRA 140B or DRA 140C;  or Consent of Instructor.
Conceptualization, creation, casting, rehearsing, and concert presentation of complete dances, with students integrating elements of stagecraft and directing the on-stage rehearsals. 
DRA 146A
Professional Track Modern Dance I
Consent of Instructor.
Professionally oriented performance training. Rigorous, consistent training regimen based on traditional modern dance technique. Breath and voice, skeletal and muscular placement, moving from the spine, contraction technique, movement intention.
DRA 146B
Professional Track Modern Dance II
DRA 146A;  and Consent of Instructor.
Body and space relationships in solos, duets and group work; stylistic variations of Graham technique; works of Paul Taylor.
DRA 146C
Professional Track Modern Dance III
DRA 146A;  DRA 146B;  and Consent of Instructor.
Continuation of DRA 146B. Time as a theatrical device, sustaining movement and non-movement, phrasing, musicality.
DRA 158
Performance Studies Undergraduate Seminar
Consent of Instructor.  DRA 156AN recommended.
Focused inquiry into a particular genre, period, movement, artist, or theme in performance. Philosophical and aesthetic issues as well as historical and cultural performance contexts. In-depth research projects in relationship to the subject of inquiry.
DRA 160A
Principles of Playwriting
Consent of Instructor.
Analysis of dramatic structure; preparation of scenarios; the composition of plays.
DRA 160B
Principles of Playwriting
DRA 160A;  and Consent of Instructor.
Analysis of dramatic structure; preparation of scenarios; the composition of plays.
DRA 174
Acting for Camera
Consent of Instructor.
Analysis and practice of acting skills required for camera work and digital media.
DRA 175
Small Scale Film Production
Consent of Instructor.
Lecture and intensive workshop teaching small-scale film production. Appointments as a(n) director, director of photography, actor, writer, lighting designer, sound designer and other critical positions are used to produce and submit a short film to a film festival.
DRA 180
Theatre Laboratory
Consent of Instructor.
Projects in acting, production, scene design, costuming, lighting, directing, and playwriting. Participation in departmental productions.
DRA 180A
Theatre Laboratory: Performance
Consent of Instructor.Limited enrollment; admission by audition.
Rehearsal and performance of a production directed or choreographed by visiting Granada Artists-in-Residence and/or faculty, and/or the UG Edge Festival.
DRA 180B
Theatre Laboratory: Design
Consent of Instructor.
Design-related participation in Theatre & Dance productions involves research, creation and implementation of design concept in collaboration with the director and other members of the production team.
DRA 180C
Theatre Laboratory: Management, Directing, other Production Team
Consent of Instructor.
Participation in Theatre & Dance production in management, direction, choreography, dramaturgy, writing or other production related role; research, creation and implementation of production concept in collaboration with members of the production team and cast. 
DRA 180C
Theatre Laboratory: Management, Directing, other Production Team
Consent of Instructor.
Participation in Theatre & Dance production in management, direction, choreography, dramaturgy, writing or other production related role; research, creation and implementation of production concept in collaboration with members of the production team and cast.
DRA 180D
Theatre Laboratory: Crew
Consent of Instructor.
Participation in Theatre & Dance productions as backstage running crew which will involve skill development, rehearsal and execution of performance.
DRA 180E
Theatre Laboratory: Scenic
Consent of Instructor.
Practical experience working on scenery and properties for Theatre & Dance department productions. Study and execution of basic scenery and prop engineering, construction, painting, rigging. Study of techniques, materials, tools, and equipment use. Skill development, professional etiquette. Safety training requirement.
DRA 180F
Theatre Laboratory: Costume
Consent of Instructor.
Practical experience working on costumes for Theatre & Dance department productions. Study and execution of basic costume construction techniques and materials, tools, and equipment use. Skills development, professional etiquette. Safety training requirement.
DRA 180G
Theatre Laboratory: Lighting/Sound/Projection
Consent of Instructor.
Practical experience working on lighting, sound or projections for Theatre & Dance department productions. Study and execution of basic techniques, materials, tools, and equipment use. Skill development, professional etiquette. Safety training requirement.
DRA 194HA
Special Study for Honors Students
Qualification for Letters & Science Honors Program and admission to Theatre & Dance Senior Honors Program.
Preparation and presentation of a culminating project, under the supervision of an instructor, in one of the creative or scholarly areas of Theatre & Dance.
DRA 194HB
Special Study for Honors Students
Consent of Instructor.  Qualification for Letters & Science Honors Program and admission to Theatre & Dance Senior Honors Program.
Preparation and presentation of a culminating project, under the supervision of an instructor, in one of the creative or scholarly areas of Theatre & Dance.
DRA 197T
Tutoring in Dramatic Art
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division or graduate standing with major in Theatre & Dance; consent of department chairperson.
Leading of small voluntary groups affiliated with one of the department's regular courses.
DRA 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

DRA 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

DRA 211
Advanced Voice & Speech
Consent of Instructor.Open only to Dramatic Arts Students and Ph.D. students with an emphasis in Performance and Theatre.
Review a progression of exercises to free, develop and strengthen the voice, first as a human instrument, and then as an actor's instrument using various texts such as Shakespeare, Ibsen and contemporary plays. Required for the M.F.A. degree in Acting.
DRA 212
Advanced Stage Movement
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing in the MFA Program.Open to advanced undergraduates by consent of instructor. 
Application of modes of exploration, breath placement, and the use of imagery as well as Laban's effort/shape system as a method of analysis in classic and modern plays. 
DRA 221
Special Problems in Advanced Acting
Consent of Instructor.
Advanced acting problems arising from differences in the type and style of plays selected from Greece to the present.
DRA 224A
Seminar in Theatrical Design: Ancient Worlds; Early 17th Century
Consent of Instructor.
Group study while focusing primarily on one discipline: scenic, costume or lighting design. Periods covered: Greek, Medieval, Renaissance, Shakespearean, Jacobean, early 17th century. Design projects include script analysis, research of period style, fashion, character development, developing design concepts, presentation skills.
DRA 224B
Seminar in Theatrical Design: Mid-17th Century to 1900
Consent of Instructor.
Group study focusing primarily on one discipline: scenic, costume or lighting design. Periods covered: Cavalier, Restoration 18th century opera and ballet, 19th century drama. Design projects include script analysis, research of period style, fashion, character development, developing design concepts,presentation skills.
DRA 224C
Seminar in Theatrical Design: the 20th Century
Consent of Instructor.
Group study focusing primarily on one discipline-scenic, costume or lighting design. Genres covered in 20th century: Realism, Brecht, Musicals, Contemporary   Dance, short narrative film. Design projects include script analysis, research of period style, fashion, character development, developing design concepts, presentation skills.
DRA 224D
Seminar in Theatrical Design: Contemporary Concepts
Consent of Instructor.
Group study focusing primarily on one discipline: scenic, costume or lighting design. Emphasis on contemporary design concepts for new works and classics: Shakespeare, modern dance, concept plays and musicals. Script and character analysis for design in performance, research, design projects.
DRA 224E
Seminar in Theatrical Design: Advanced Concepts
Consent of Instructor.
Group study focusing primarily on one discipline: scenic, costume or lighting design. Emphasis on special issues in contemporary design concepts for new works and classics. Script and character analysis for design in performance, research, design projects.
DRA 225
Performance Design Studio: Techniques & Media
DRA 224A (can be concurrent) or DRA 224B (can be concurrent) or DRA 224C (can be concurrent) or DRA 224D (can be concurrent) or DRA 224E (can be concurrent);  Consent of Instructor.
Exploration and development of techniques and skills in the performance design process. Drafting, model building, drawing, painting and rendering, costume drawing, color theory, lighting techniques, design portfolio preparation and presentation. 
DRA 228
Seminar in Directing Theory: Non-Realism
Consent of Instructor.
Modern directing theory as it applies to non-realistic theatre; development of directorial concepts for production of selected non-realistic plays-Greek to the present; emphasis on textual analysis.
DRA 229
Special Problems in Directing
Consent of Instructor.
Projects in directing scenes selected from plays from ancient Greece to the present.
DRA 230
Advanced Problems in Choreography & Performance
Consent of Instructor.
Explores contemporary issues of choreography and performance in depth and how those issues pertain to performance work. Focus will include contemporary thought on representation, legibility, new forms, and cultural attitudes.
DRA 244
Critical Approaches to Traditional Systems of Body Movement
Consent of Instructor.
Introduction to traditional systems for body movement, development of critical approaches to them, and experiments in how they inform training and practice in theatre, dance, and performance. 
DRA 250
Modern Theatre
Consent of Instructor.
Theatre of Europe and America, 1860-1940, with emphasis on the relationship of the dramas of the period to the physical circumstances under which they were produced.
DRA 251
Scoring & Scripting in Performance
Consent of Instructor.
Process of weaving together various performance elements brought into play by the artists in their respective disciplines. The "script" is the thread from which the artists' "scores" will layer and transform the "script" into performance for specific time, place, spectators.
DRA 252
Performance: Concepts of Space, Place, & Time
Consent of Instructor.
Innovative theories of creating performance spaces, establishing a sense of place, and communicating the concept of time explored through collaborative interaction. Research includes traditional principles, site-specific spaces and consideration of various tempi from music and movement.
DRA 253
Approaches to Collaboration
Consent of Instructor.
Exploration of different approaches to collaboration among artists in different media and their influence on the creative process.
DRA 254
Performing Identities/Personae
Consent of Instructor.
Historical and contemporary theories of constructing stage identities. Discussion and project collaborations based on theories. Questions of identity related to ethnicity, gender or sexual orientation.
DRA 255
Composition in the Arts
Consent of Instructor.
Examine manner in which specific elements utilized by actors, dancers, directors, choreographers, and designers are combined or related to form a whole in space and time, as well as methods of sequencing used by each discipline to produce artistic products.
DRA 256
Visual Language for Performance
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to graduate students.
Exploration of different approaches and methods to the visual elements of performance. Focus on design and style for different media and genres, storytelling through visual elements of performance.
DRA 257
Interdisciplinary Seminar in Theatre, Dance & Performance
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to students enrolled in the M.F.A. in Dramatic Art; students taking the Ph.D. in Performance Studies or the D.E. in Studies in Performance & Practice.
Interdisciplinary seminar for first- and second-year M.F.A. students in Theatre & Dance. Topics range from current practice in dance, theatre, film and performance, to leading edge developments by outstanding practitioners in the field.
DRA 259
Topics in Contemporary Theatre & Performance
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics designed to study in depth aspects of contemporary performance including performance analysis, cultural and historical context, modes of production, theoretical and political entailments, and issues of spectatorship; e.g., "Brecht & After," "British Theater," "Race & Gender in Performance."
DRA 260
Approaches & Methodologies to Studies in Performance & Practice
Admission to any graduate program in the University and consent of instructor.Preference to students enrolled in the Designated Emphasis in Studies in Performance and Practice.
Instruction is offered a variety of disciplinary approaches and methodologies in Performance & Practice, with a focus is on cross-disciplinary learning and research. Usually offered each quarter.
DRA 265A
Performance Studies: Modes of Production
Consent of Instructor.
Introduces students to the literature of performance production in a variety of media: theatre, dance, film, video, computer-based, looking at cultural, aesthetic, rhetorical and political theory. Usually offered in alternate years.
DRA 265B
Peformance Studies: Signification & the Body
Consent of Instructor.
Introduces students to analysis of the body in performance, drawing on theoretical models from several fields.
DRA 265C
Performance Studies: Performance & Society
Consent of Instructor.
Introduces students to the role of performance (broadly defined), in everyday life, sociopolitical negotiation, identity, social movements, the media, and the state.
DRA 265D
 Performance studies: Theory, History, Criticism
Consent of Instructor.
Introduction to the theory, history and criticism, informing performance studies.
DRA 280
Theatre Laboratory
Consent of Instructor.
Advanced practice in acting, designing, directing, playwriting, and technical theatre.
DRA 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

DRA 299
Individual Study
Consent of Instructor.
Individual study.
DRA 299D
Dissertation Research
Consent of Instructor.
Dissertation research.
DRA 396
Teaching Assitant Training Practicum
Consent of Instructor.

DRA 413
Stage Make-up
Consent of Instructor.
Approved for graduate degree credit. Lectures, demonstrations, and practical work in aspects of theatrical make-up.
DVM 444
Equine Ophthalmology
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Ongoing education, training, and experience in an ophthalmic specialty practice dealing with equine patients. Learn to take histories related to ocular problems, to competently examine an eye, and to perform basic diagnostic procedures.
DVM 445
California Animal Health & Food Safety Laboratory - Davis
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Overview of how CAHFS interfaces with the production animal industry and practitioners. Understanding of the laboratory approach to the diagnosis of predominately production animal diseases.
DVM 446
Pre-approved Externship
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Approved program of study to receive training and experience in specific areas outside the School of Veterinary Medicine. These include private practice, industry, and academic institutions and allow students to pursue specific career paths with excellent educational opportunities.
DVM 447
Educational Leadership
Consent of Instructor.  Third- and/or fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
To gain knowledge and experience in various aspects of veterinary education and leadership, students will work under faculty mentorship to assist in the delivery of the content in a block in years 1, 2 or 3 of the curriculum. This could be in the form of co-presenting a lecture, co-teaching a lab, facilitating a PBL, or other content-related activities deemed appropriate by faculty.
DVM 448
California Animal Health & Food Safety Laboratory - San Bernardino
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Overview of how CAHFS interfaces with the production animal industry and practitioners. Understanding of the laboratory approach to the diagnosis of predominately production animal diseases.
DVM 449
Externship
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Approved program of study to receive training and experience outside the School of Veterinary Medicine. Opportunities include private practice and provides first-hand experiences in diagnostic and therapeutic capabilities and management and business methods in the private sector.
DVM 450
Cardiology
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Diagnostic techniques of history taking, cardiac physical examination, electrocardiography, radiography, echocardiography, and cardiac catheterization and medical, interventional, and surgical therapy of cardiac disorders will be taught along with the etiology and pathophysiology of various cardiac disorders.
DVM 451
Clinical Pathology - VMTH
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Focus on the practical use and application of laboratory testing in a practice setting to facilitate optimal management of patients.
DVM 452
Community Practice
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Practice wellness care in pediatric and adult patients, address medical management of geriatric patients, and develop a practical, problem-oriented approach to routine medical issues presenting in general practice.
DVM 453
Community Surgery - Gourley Clinical Teaching Center
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
General surgery service to include instruction in physical exams, basic anesthesia, pain management and routine surgeries. Sample surgeries include routine spays and neuters, cystotomy, mass removal, digit amputation, encluceation, etc.
DVM 454
Companion Avian & Pet Exotics
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Basic components of husbandry, nutrition, handling, diseases, medical and surgical treatment of companion exotics including avian (companion and wildlife), small exotic mammal, reptilian, amphibian and aquatic animal patients.
DVM 455
Dentistry / Oral Surgery
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Examination, diagnosis and treatment of small animals presenting with oral or dental diseases.
DVM 456
Dermatology
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Exposure to veterinary dermatology. Learn the importance of obtaining a good history, performing a good physical examination and characterizing lesions. Various diagnostic and therapeutic techniques specific to dermatology will be demonstrated.
DVM 457
Equine Emergency Surgery
Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
In-depth training and hands-on experience in various facets of equine emergency case management, including the diagnosis, management, and treatment of equine emergency patients.
DVM 458
Equine Emergency Nights
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Provide service for emergency surgical and medical management for all equine and camelid emergencies; i.e., colic, wounds, musculoskeletal injuries, septic foals, dystocia, and neurologic and ophthalmologic emergencies.
DVM 459
Equine Field Service
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
On-farm practical experience in the diagnosis, treatment and prevention of equine disease problems.
DVM 460
Equine Medicine In House
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Learn and practice the highest level of equine internal medicine with the goal to generate or implement a problem-oriented approach to clinical problems, determine a diagnostic work-up, prognosis and treatment plan for patients.
DVM 461
Theriogenology
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Routine reproductive management in small and large animals in a tertiary referral setting at the VMTH. Participate in weekly clinical and endocrinology rounds.
DVM 462
Equine Surgery & Lameness
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Advanced training and experience in equine surgery services to manage all orthopedic and non-orthopedic elective surgical disorders as well as equine lameness disorders.
DVM 463
Farrier & Sports Medicine
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Introduction to the normal structure and function of the equine foot. Principles of corrective shoeing for many lameness disorders.
DVM 464
Community Surgery - CCAH
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
General surgery service to include instruction in physical exams, basic anesthesia, pain management and routine surgeries. Surgeries include routine spays and neuters and other minor procedures such as simple mass removals.
DVM 465
Equine Surgery & Lameness II
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Advanced training and experience in equine surgery services to manage all orthopedic and non-orthopedic elective surgical disorders as well as equine lameness disorders.
DVM 466
Internal Medicine B
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Improve clinical skills required to manage cases in the Small Animal Service including comprehensive histories, performing complete physical examinations, obtaining samples, interpreting results, conducting special procedures and assisting faculty and residents in the diagnosis, prevention, management and treatment of disease.
DVM 467
Small Animal Outpatient Medicine
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Exposure to general medicine outpatient cases and to develop a practical, problem oriented approach to routine medical issues presenting in general practice.
DVM 468
California Animal Health & Food Safety Laboratory - Tulare
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Overview of how CAHFS interfaces with the production animal industry and practitioners. Understanding of the laboratory approach to the diagnosis of predominately production animal diseases.
DVM 469
California Animal Health & Food Safety Laboratory - Turlock
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Overview of how CAHFS interfaces with the production animal industry and practitioners. Understanding of the laboratory approach to the diagnosis of predominately production animal diseases.
DVM 470
Food Animal Preceptorship
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Individual animal medicine and surgery as well as herd reproductive 
DVM 471
Livestock Medicine & Surgery In House
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Hands-on clinical experience diagnosing, treating, and managing medical and surgical diseases of primary care and referral cases involving dairy cattle, beef cattle, sheep, dairy goats, meat goats, and pigs.
DVM 472
Livestock Reproduction / Herd Health
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Exposure to individual animal medicine and surgery as well as herd reproductive programs on the farm. A regular client base with a variety of species is served: dairy cattle, beef cattle, goats and sheep.
DVM 473
Dairy Production Medicine - Tulare
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Advanced training and experience in a clinical dairy health and production medicine delivery system. Exposure to contemporary dairy production and population medicine programs. Develop the ability to communicate with producers and farm employees.
DVM 474
Equine Emergency/Critical Care Medicine
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
In-depth training and hands-on experience in various facets of equine emergency case management, including the diagnosis, management, and treatment of both equine emergency medical and surgical patients.
DVM 475
Laboratory Animal Medicine
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Provide exposure to various management activities and techniques used by laboratory animal veterinarians both antemortem & postmortem to support animal research primarily involving rodents but may include many vertebrates from fish to non-human primates.
DVM 476
Large Animal Anesthesia
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Advanced training and experience in anesthetic management, acute care problem-solving and decision-making of healthy and physiologically stressed large animal patients.  
DVM 477
Large Animal Radiology
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Training in the art of making quality radiographs of large animal patients and interpreting radiographic studies.
DVM 478
Large Animal Ultrasonography
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Hands-on experience in the ultrasonographic diagnosis of primarily musculoskeletal injuries and abdominal disorders in horses and the occasional non-equine patient.
DVM 479
Small Animal Emergency; Nights
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Emergency practice includes the immediate recognition, evaluation, and care of patients with acute illness and injury.
DVM 480
Neurology / Neurosurgery
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Provide specialized veterinary care for animals with neurological diseases; i.e., disorders of the brain, inner ear, spinal cord, and vertebrae and diseases affecting muscles, nerves and the neuromuscular junction.
DVM 481
Nutrition
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Advanced training and experience in the principles and practice of small animal clinical nutrition.
DVM 482
Medical Oncology
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Advanced training and experience in diagnosis, staging, medical management, and prognostication of cancer in animal patients.
DVM 483
Small Animal Ophthalmology
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Ongoing education, training, and experience in an ophthalmic specialty practice dealing with companion and exotic species. Learn to take histories related to ocular problems, to competently examine an eye, and to perform basic diagnostic procedures.
DVM 484
Orthopedic Surgery
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Lameness examinations and treatments for all orthopedic diseases to include osteoarthritis, developmental diseases, trauma-induced injuries and cancer. Both medical and surgical treatments are used and presented to owners in an evidenced based fashion.
DVM 485
Anatomic Pathology
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Advanced training and experience to develop a general understanding of the nature of common pathologic lesions and their interpretation in light of clinical history. Postmortem techniques and practice in writing descriptions of gross lesions.
DVM 486
Primate Medicine
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Acquire skills to perform physical examinations, blood collection, cystocentesis, catheter placement, fluid therapy, basic wound care, bandaging, suturing, amputations, and orogastric tube feedings.
DVM 487
Radiation Oncology
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Staging and treatment of patients with cancer and use of radiation therapy in the treatment of cancer in companion animals. Management of clinical patients, the indications for radiation therapy and technical aspects treatment planning and dose calculations.
DVM 488
Shelter Medicine / Surgery
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Exposure to all areas in a variety of shelters in the Sacramento and Bay Area. Accompany Shelter Medicine Program personnel on consultations; depending on schedule.
DVM 489
Integrative Medicine
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Participate in physical rehabilitation evaluation to diagnose movement dysfunction, design and effectively implement an evidence-based treatment plan to restore, maintain or enhance optimal physical function after injury, surgery or disability. Emphasis on development of observation and manual assessment skills.
DVM 490
Small Animal Anesthesia
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Experience in anesthetizing small animals in a clinical setting.
DVM 491
Small Animal Emergency
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Emergency practice includes the immediate recognition, evaluation, and care of patients with acute illness and injury.
DVM 492
Intensive Care Unit
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Gain and demonstrate competence in both the immediate and ongoing care of a diverse group of critically ill small animal patients. Gain proficiency in invasive procedures, cardiopulmonary resuscitation, stabilization of the respiratory distress patient and hemodynamic stabilization. 
DVM 493
Internal Medicine A
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Improve clinical skills required to manage cases in the Small Animal Service including comprehensive histories, preforming complete physical examinations, obtaining samples, interpreting results, conducting special procedures and assisting faculty and residents in the diagnosis, prevention, management and treatment of disease.
DVM 494
Small Animal Radiology
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Participate in technical aspects of producing radiographs, interpreting radiographic and other diagnostic imaging studies and performing diagnostic ultrasound exams.
DVM 495
Soft Tissue Surgery
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Participate in management of cases referred for advanced surgical techniques to include all aspects of case management from hospital admission to discharge including daily case rounds.
DVM 496
Behavior
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Understand the importance of behavior in companion animal practice, primarily that of dogs and cats. Apply the knowledge to prevent and treat problematic behaviors in companion animals.
DVM 497
Research
Consent of Instructor.  Third- and/or fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Research rotations are designed for combined degree students who require a period of time (up to 19 weeks) to complete a discrete portion of their thesis work.
DVM 498
Aquatic Medicine
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Focus on the application of basic fish health principles to address current problems as experienced by fish as held for research, as large populations in state fish hatcheries and as part of the collection of large public/private aquaria.
DVM 499
Zoological Medicine
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Experience in order to become proficient in performing physical examinations and collecting diagnostic samples form a variety of non-domestic animals. Majority of rotation time spent providing patient care at the Sacramento Zoo.
EAD 230
Topics in Computational Fluid Dynamics
EAD 210A;  EAD 210B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Hands-on approach to numerical methods for compressible fluid flow.Readings and discussions of solution strategies will be complemented with programming exercises and projects to give first-hand experience with performance and accuracy of several computational methods;from upwind differencing to Godunov methods.
EAD 289A
Special Topics in Applied Science: Atomic, Molecular, & Optical Physics
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Special topic in Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics.
EAD 289B
Special Topics in Applied Science: Chemical Physics
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Special topic in Chemical Physics.
EAD 289C
Computational Physics: Computational Physics
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Special topic in Computational Physics.
EAD 289D
Special Topics in Applied Science: Biophotonics/Biotechnology
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Special topic in Biophotonics/Biotechnology.
EAD 289E
Special Topics in Applied Science: Materials Science
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Special topic in Materials Science.
EAD 289F
Special Topics in Applied Science: Imaging Science & Photonics
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Special topic in Imaging Science and Photonics.
EAD 289G
Special Topics in Applied Science: Nonlinear Optics
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Special topic in Nonlinear Optics.
EAD 289H
Special Topics in Applied Science: Plasma/Fusion Energy Physics
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Special topic in Plasma/Fusion Energy Physics.
EAD 289I
Special Topics in Applied Science: Quantum Electronics
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Special topic in Quantum Electronics.
EAD 289J
Special Topics in Applied Science: Condensed Matter/Statistical Physics
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Special topic in Condensed Matter/Statistical Physics.
EAD 289K
Special Topics in Applied Science: Classical Optics
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Special topic in Classical Optics.
EAD 289L
Special Topics in Applied Science: Microwave & Millimeter-Wave Technology
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Special topic in Microwave and Millimeter-Wave Technology.
EAD 289M
Special Topics in Applied Science: Synchrotron Radiation Science
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Special topic in Synchrotron Radiation Science.
EAD 289N
Special Topics in Applied Science: Space Physics
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Special topic in Space Physics.
EAD 290C
Graduate Research Group Conference
Consent of Instructor.

EAE 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.

EAE 126
Theoretical & Computational Aerodynamics
(ENG 180 C- or better or EAD 115 C- or better or MAT 128C C- or better or EME 115 C- or better);  EAE 127 C- or better.
Development of general equations of fluid motion. Study of flow field kinematics and dynamics. Flow about a body. Thin airfoil theory. Viscous effects. Applications of numerical methods to wing analysis and design.
EAE 126
Theoretical & Computational Aerodynamics
ENG 103 C- or better;  ENG 105 C- or better;  (ENG 180 C- or better or EAD 115 C- or better or MAT 128C C- or better or EME 115 C- or better).
Development of general equations of fluid motion. Study of flow field kinematics and dynamics. Flow about a body. Thin airfoil theory. Viscous effects. Applications of numerical methods to wing analysis and design.
EAE 127
Applied Aircraft Aerodynamics
EME 106 C- or better.
Principles, governing equations, and predictive theories for aircraft aerodynamics. Lift and drag of 2D airfoils, 3D wings, and high-lift devices. 
EAE 129
Stability & Control of Aerospace Vehicles
ENG 102 C- or better.Restricted to upper division standing.
Aircraft and spacecraft stability and control. Derivation of fundamental equations of motion for aircraft/spacecraft. Fundamentals of feedback. Aircraft flight control systems. Spacecraft attitude control systems.
EAE 130A
Aircraft Performance & Design
EAE 127 C- or better;  EAE 129 C- or better (can be concurrent).
Major aircraft design experience with multiple realistic constraints including aerodynamics, performance analysis, weight estimation, stability and control, and appropriate engineering standards.
EAE 130B
Aircraft Performance & Design
EAE 130A C- or better.Restricted to upper division standing.
Major aircraft design experience including detailed design, cost analysis, analysis of aircraft structure, propulsion system, aerodynamics, aircraft handling qualities, manufacturing, or meeting relevant engineering standards.
EAE 133
Finite Element Methods in Structures
ENG 104 C- or better.Open to College of Engineering Students.
Introduction to the aerospace structural design process. History of aircraft and spacecraft materials. Effects of loading beyond elastic limit. Deflections and stresses due to combined loading. Virtual work principles, and finite element methods. Applications to aerospace structures.
EAE 135
Aerospace Structures
ENG 104 C- or better;  EAE 126 or EAE 127 recommended.
Analysis and design methods used in aerospace structures. Shear flow in open, closed and multicell beam cross-sections, buckling of flat and curved sheets, tension field beams, local buckling.
EAE 137
Structural Composites
ENG 104 C- or better.
Overview of materials and technology for creating structures from fiber reinforced resin matrix composite material systems. Elementary design analysis and case studies emphasizing aeronautical applications.
EAE 138
Aircraft Propulsion
EME 106 C- or better.
Analysis/design of modern aircraft gas turbine engines. Development/application of cycle performance prediction techniques. Introduction to design of inlets, compressors, burners, turbines, and nozzles. Cycle design for specific applications.
EAE 140
Rocket Propulsion
EME 106 C- or better.Restricted to upper division standing.
Fluid and thermodynamics of rocket engines, liquid and solid rocket propulsion. Space propulsion concepts and space mission requirements.
EAE 141
Space Systems Design
ENG 102 C- or better;  EME 106 C- or better.
Introduction to space systems design including space project organization, requirements definition and specification, concepts formulation, system tradeoffs, subsystem design. Prototype space mission concepts are presented and a multidisciplinary mission design is developed that considers all relevant architecture elements.  
EAE 142
Orbital Mechanics
ENG 102 C- or better.Restricted to upper division standing.
Satellite orbits, multistage rockets, current global boosters, and new technologies. Design application problems include satellites, trajectory optimizations, and interplanetary trajectories.
EAE 143A
Space Vehicle Design
ENG 102 C- or better;  ENG 103 C- or better;  ENG 105 C- or better.
Governing equations and operational practices of robotic and human space travel. Principles of Systems Engineering are introduced and are used as a basis for a team project in spacecraft reverse-engineering and design. 
EAE 189C
Flight Simulation & Testing in Design of Aircraft & Spacecraft
ENG 102;  and Consent of Instructor.
Teaches flight test techniques together with data analysis methods to prepare students for any type of flight testing including fixed wing, rotary wing and launch vehicles. 
EAE 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

EAE 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

EAP 090X
International Education Seminar
Open to lower division applicants for EAP or UC Davis study abroad and international internship programs.
Seminar examines the academic, cultural, and personal issues of study abroad, including academic programs abroad, country-specific history and culture, cross-cultural experiences, culture shock, racial and gender issues.
EAP 180
Education Abroad: Special Topics 
Minimum GPA requirement for each study abroad program as specified in the written agreement between UC Davis and the host institution; prerequisites for language courses may also apply.
Students who participate in approved international programs take this course up to 12 units while studying abroad.
EAP 190X
International Education Seminar
Open to upper division applicants for EAP or UC Davis study abroad and international internship programs.
Seminar examines the academic, cultural, and personal issues of study abroad, including academic programs abroad, country-specific history and culture, cross-cultural experiences, culture shock, racial and gender issues.
EAP 192
Internship in Education Abroad
Participation in a study abroad program.
Internship with Education Abroad program, potentially either at university or taught abroad.
EAS 113
Cinema & Society in China
HIS 190C;  HIS 193; or Consent of Instructor.
Knowledge of Chinese not required. Viewing and analysis of one Chinese film with English subtitles each week, followed by discussion and short essays. Cinematic technique, social values and film topics from 1930s to today. 
EAS 190
East Asian Studies Seminar
Upper division standing or consent of instructor.
Political, social, cultural, and economic issues in East Asia. Topic varies each year.  
EAS 192
East Asian Studies Seminar
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Work experience in the East Asian Studies field, with analytical term paper on a topic approved by the instructor.
EAS 194H
Special Study for Honors Students
Open only to majors of senior standing who qualify for Honors Program.
Guided research, under the direction of a faculty member, leading to a senior honors thesis on a topic in East Asian Studies culture, society, or language.
EAS 196A
Honors Seminar
Consent of Instructor.  GPA of 3.500 in the major; senior standing.
A two-quarter research project culminating in an Honors thesis. A grade of B or higher must be earned to qualify the student for honors distinction at graduation.
EAS 196B
Honors Seminar
Consent of Instructor.  GPA of 3.500 in the major, senior standing.
A two-quarter research project culminating in an Honors thesis. A grade of B or higher must be earned to qualify the student for honors distinction at graduation.
EAS 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

EBS 075
Properties of Materials in Biological Systems
BIS 002A;  PHY 009C (can be concurrent).
Properties of typical biological materials; composition and structure with emphasis on the effects of physical and biochemical properties on design of engineered systems; interactions of biological materials with typical engineering materials.
EBS 090C
Research Group Conference in Biological Systems Engineering
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing in Biological Systems Engineering or Food Engineering.
Research group conference. 
EBS 092
Internship in Biological Systems Engineering
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing; project approval prior to period of internship.
Supervised work experience in biological systems engineering.  
EBS 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Group study of selected topics; restricted to lower division students.
EBS 103
Fluid Mechanics Fundamentals
PHY 009B.
Fluid mechanics axioms, fluid statics, kinematics, velocity fields for one-dimensional incompressible flow and boundary layers, turbulent flow time averaging, potential flow, dimensional analysis, and macroscopic balances to solve a range of practical problems.
EBS 114
Principles of Field Machinery Design
ENG 102;  ENG 104.
Traction and stability of vehicles with wheels or tracks. Operating principles of field machines and basic mechanisms used in their design.
EBS 115
Forest Engineering
ENG 104.
Applications of engineering principles to problems in forestry including those in forest regeneration, harvesting, residue utilization, and transportation.
EBS 120
Power Systems Design
ENG 017;  ENG 102;  ENG 103;  ENG 105.
Design and performance of power devices and systems including combustion engines, electric generators and motors, fluid power systems, fuels, and emerging technologies.  Selection of units for power matching and optimum performance.
EBS 125
Heat Transfer in Biological Systems
EBS 075;  ENG 105;  BIS 002A;  BIS 002B;  BIS 002C.
Fundamentals of heat transfer with application to biological systems.  Steady and transient heat transfer.  Analysis and simulation of heat conduction, convection and radiation.  Heat transfer operations. 
EBS 125
Heat Transfer in Biological Systems
BIS 002A;  EBS 075;  ENG 103;  ENG 105.
Fundamentals of heat transfer with application to biological systems. Steady and transient heat transfer. Analysis and simulation of heat conduction, convection and radiation. Heat transfer operations.
EBS 127
Mass Transfer & Kinetics in Biological Systems
EBS 125.
Fundamentals of mass transfer and kinetics in biological systems. Molecular diffusion and convection. Thermodynamics and bioenergetics. Biological and chemical rate equations. Heterogeneous kinetics.  Batch and continuous reaction processes. Mass transfer operations.
EBS 128
Biomechanics & Ergonomics
STA 100;  ENG 102.Limited enrollment.
Anatomical, physiological, and biomechanical bases of physical ergonomics. Human motor capabilities, body mechanics, kinematics and anthropometry. Use of bioinstrumentation, industrial surveillance techniques and the NIOSH lifting guide. Cumulative trauma disorders. Static and dynamic biomechanical modeling. Emphasis on low back, shoulder and hand/wrist biomechanics.
EBS 130
Modeling of Dynamic Processes in Biological Systems
EBS 075;  (ENG 006 or ECS 030);  MAT 022B C- or better.
Techniques for modeling processes through mass and energy balance, rate equations, and equations of state. Computer problem solution of models. Example models include package design, evaporation, respiration heating, thermal processing of foods, and plant growth.
EBS 130
Modeling of Dynamic Processes in Biological Systems
(ENG 006 or ECS 032A);  (MAT 022B C- or better or MAT 027B C- or better);  EBS 075.
Techniques for modeling processes through mass & energy balance, rate equations, and equations of state. Computer problem solution of models. Example models include package design, evaporation, respiration heating, thermal processing of foods, and plant growth.
EBS 135
Bioenvironmental Engineering
EBS 125;  EBS 130.
Biological responses to environmental conditions. Principles and engineering design of environmental control systems. Overview of environmental pollution problems and legal restrictions for biological systems, introduction of environmental quality assessment techniques, and environmental pollution control technologies.
EBS 144
Groundwater Hydrology
MAT 016B or MAT 021A;  HYD 103 or ENG 103 recommended.
Fundamentals of groundwater flow and contaminant hydrology. Occurrence, distribution, and movement of groundwater. Well-flow systems. Aquifer tests. Well construction operation and maintenance. Groundwater exploration and quality assessment. Agricultural threats to groundwater quality: fertilizers, pesticides, salts. 
EBS 145
Irrigation & Drainage Systems
EBS 103 or HYD 103N.
Engineering and scientific principles applied to the design of surface, sprinkle and micro irrigation systems and drainage systems within economic, biological, and environmental constraints. Interaction between irrigation and drainage.
EBS 147
Runoff, Erosion & Water Quality Management
(PHY 007B or PHY 009B);  (MAT 016C or MAT 017C or MAT 021C);  (ECI 142 or HYD 141 or ESM 100);  or equivalent.
Practical hydrology and runoff water quality management from disturbed watersheds. Development of hillslope and soils restoration concepts and practice, modeling and application. 
EBS 161
Kinetics & Bioreactor Design
EBS 127.
Provide the basic principles of reactor design for bioprocess applications. Emphasizes the following topics: 1) kinetics and reactor engineering principles; 2) bio-reaction kinetics; and 3) bioreactor design.
EBS 165
Bioinstrumentation & Control
ENG 100.
Instrumentation and control for biological production systems. Measurement system concepts, instrumentation and transducers for sensing physical and biological parameters, data acquisition and control.
EBS 170A
Engineering Design & Professional Responsibilities
EBS 001;  ENG 102;  ENG 104.
Engineering design including professional responsibilities. Emphasis on project selection, data sources, specifications, human factors, biological materials, safety systems, and professionalism. Detailed design proposals developed for EBS 170B and EBS 170BL.
EBS 170B
Engineering Projects: Design
EBS 170A;  EBS 170BL (can be concurrent);  EBS 170BL required concurrently.
Individual or group projects involving the design of devices, structures, or systems to solve specific engineering problems in biological systems.  Project for study is jointly selected by student and instructor.
EBS 170BL
Engineering Projects: Design Laboratory
EBS 170B (can be concurrent);  EBS 170B required concurrently.
Individual or group projects involving the design of devices, structures, or systems to solve specific engineering problems in biological systems.
EBS 170C
Engineering Projects: Design Evaluation
EBS 170B;  EBS 170CL (can be concurrent);  EBS 170CL required concurrently.
Individual or group projects involving the fabrication, assembly and testing of components, devices, structures, or systems designed to solve specific engineering problems in biological systems. Project for study previously selected by student and instructor in EBS 170B.
EBS 170CL
Engineering Projects: Design Evaluation
EBS 170C (can be concurrent);  EBS 170C required concurrently.
Individual or group projects involving the fabrication, assembly and testing of components, devices, structures, or systems designed to solve specific engineering problems in biological systems.
EBS 175
Rheology of Biological Materials
EBS 103 or ENG 103.
Fluid and solid rheology, viscoelastic behavior of foods and other biological materials, and application of rheological properties to food and biological systems (i.e., pipeline design, extrusion, mixing, coating).
EBS 189A
Special Topics in Biological Systems Engineering: Agricultural Engineering
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing in Engineering.
Special topics in Agricultural Engineering. 
EBS 189B
Special Topics in Biological Systems Engineering: Aquacultural Engineering
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing in Engineering.
Special topics in Aquacultural Engineering. 
EBS 189C
Special Topics in Biological Systems Engineering: Biomedical Engineering
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing in Engineering.
Special topics in Biomedical Engineering.
EBS 189D
Special Topics in Biological Systems Engineering: Biotechnical Engineering
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing in Engineering.
Special topics in Biotechnical Engineering.
EBS 189E
Special Topics in Biological Systems Engineering: Ecological Systems Engineering
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing in Engineering.
Special topics in Ecological Systems Engineering.
EBS 189F
Special Topics in Biological Systems Engineering: Food Engineering
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing in Engineering.
Special topics in Food Engineering.
EBS 189G
Special Topics in Biological Systems Engineering: Forest Engineering
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing in Engineering.
Special topics in Forest Engineering.
EBS 190C
Research Group Conference in Biological Systems Engineering
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing in Biological Systems Engineering of Food Engineering.
Research group conference.
EBS 192
Internship in Biological Systems Engineering
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing; approval of project prior to period of internship.
Supervised work experience in biological systems engineering.
EBS 197T
Tutoring in Biological Systems Engineering
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Tutoring individual students, leading small voluntary discussion groups, or assisting the instructor in laboratories affiliated with one of the department's regular courses. 
EBS 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

EBS 200
Research Methods in Biological Systems Engineering
Graduate standing.
Planning, execution and reporting of research projects. Literature review techniques and proposal preparation. Record keeping and patents. Uncertainty analysis in experiments and computations. Graphic analysis. Oral and written presentation of research results, manuscript preparation, submission and review.
EBS 205
Continuum Mechanics of Natural Systems
MAT 021D;  MAT 022B;  PHY 009B.
Continuum mechanics of static and dynamic air, water, earth and biological systems using hydraulic, heat and electrical conductivity; diffusivity; dispersion; strain; stress; deformation gradient; velocity gradient; stretch and spin tensors.
EBS 205
Continuum Mechanics of Natural Systems
MAT 021D;  MAT 022B;  PHY 009B.
Continuum mechanics of static and dynamic air, water, earth and biological systems using hydraulic, heat and electrical conductivity; diffusivity; dispersion; strain; stress; deformation gradient; velocity gradient; stretch and spin tensors.
EBS 215
Soil-Machine Relations in Tillage & Traction
EBS 114.
Mechanics of interactions between agricultural soils and tillage and traction devices; determination of relevant physical properties of soil; analyses of stress and strains in soil due to machine-applied loads; experimental and analytical methods for synthesizing characteristics of overall systems.
EBS 216
Energy Systems
ENG 105;  or equivalent.
Theory and application of energy systems. Systems analysis, energy conversion technologies, environmental considerations, economics and system optimization.
EBS 218
Solar Thermal  Engineering
Course in heat transfer.
Analysis and design of solar energy collection systems. Sun-earth geometry and estimation of solar radiation. Steady-state and dynamic models of solar collectors. Modeling of thermal energy storage devices. Computer simulation.
EBS 220
Pilot Plant Operations in Aquacultural Engineering
(ECI 243A,  ECI 243B) or (ABT 161,  ABT 163).
Topics in water treatment as they apply to aquaculture operations. Laboratory study of unit operations in aquaculture.
EBS 228
Occupational Musculoskeletal Disorders
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Epidemiology and etiology of occupational musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) with focus on low back and upper extremities disorders; anatomical and biomechanical functions of lower back and upper extremities; MSDs risk factors assessment and control; research opportunities related to MSDs.
EBS 231
Mass Transfer in Food & Biological Systems
Graduate standing.
Application of mass transfer principles to food and biological systems. Study of mass transfer affecting food quality and shelf life. Analysis of mass transfer in polymer films used for coating and packaging foods and controlling release of biologically active compounds.
EBS 233
Analysis of Processing Operations: Drying & Evaporation
Course in food or process engineering, familiarity with FORTRAN.
Diffusion theory in drying of solids. Analysis of fixed-bed and continuous-flow dryers. Steady-state and dynamic models to predict performance evaporators: multiple effects, mechanical and thermal recompression, control systems.
EBS 235
Advanced Analysis of Unit Operations in Food & Biological Engineering
EBS 132.
Analysis and design of food processing operations. Steady state and dynamic heat and mass transfer models for operations involving phase change such as freezing and frying. Separation processes including membrane applications in food and fermentation systems.
EBS 237
Thermal Process Design
Course in heat transfer.
Heat transfer and biological basis for design of heat sterilization of foods and other biological materials in containers or in bulk.
EBS 239
Magnetic Resonance Imaging in Biological Systems
Graduate standing.
Theory and applications of magnetic resonance imaging to biological systems. Classical Bloch model of magnetic resonance. Applications to be studied are drying of fruits, flow of food suspensions, diffusion of moisture, and structure of foods.
EBS 240
Infiltration & Drainage
SSC 107;  ENG 103.
Aspects of multi-phase flow in soils and their application to infiltration and immiscible displacement problems. Gas phase transport and entrapment during infiltration, and oil-water-gas displacement will be considered.
EBS 241
Sprinkle & Trickle Irrigation Systems
EBS 145;  HYD 115.
Computerized design of sprinkle and trickle irrigation systems. Consideration of emitter mechanics, distribution functions and water yield functions.
EBS 242
Hydraulics of Surface Irrigation
EBS 145;  HYD 115.
Mathematical models of surfaceirrigation systems for prediction of the ultimate disposition of water flowing onto a field. Quantity of runoff and distribution of infiltrated water over field length as a function of slope, roughness, infiltration and inflow rates.
EBS 243
Water Resource Planning & Management
HYD 141;  Or equivalent.
Applications of deterministic and stochastic mathematical programming techniques to water resource planning, analysis, design, and management. Water allocation, capacity expansion, and reservoir operation. Conjunctive use of surface water and groundwater. Water quality management. Irrigation planning and operation models.
EBS 245
Waste Management for Biological Production Systems
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Characterization of solid and liquid wastes from animal, crop, and food production systems. Study of methods and system design for handling, treatment, and disposal/utilization of these materials.
EBS 260
Analog Instrumentation
ENG 100.
Instrument characteristics: generalized instrument models, calibration, and frequency response. Signal conditioning: operational amplifiercircuits, filtering, and noise. Transducers: motion, force, pressure, flow, temperature, and photoelectric.
EBS 262
Computer Interfacing & Control
ENG 100;  EBS 165.
Procedural and object-oriented programming in C++, analog and digital signal conversion, data acquisition and computer control.
EBS 265
Design & Analysis of Engineering Experiments
STA 100;  ASE 120; or an introductory course in statistics.
Simple linear, multiple, and polynomial regression, correlation, residuals, model selection, one-way ANOVA, fixed and random effect models, sample size, multiple comparisons, randomized block, repeated measures, and Latin square designs, factorial experiments, nested design and subsampling, split-plot design, statistical software packages.    
EBS 267
Renewable Bioprocessing
EBS 160;  (BIS 101 or MIC 102).
Applications of biotechnology and bioprocess engineering toward the use of agricultural and renewable feedstocks for the production of biochemicals.  Design and modeling of microbial- and plant-based production systems including associated fermentation, extraction, and purification processes.
EBS 268
Polysaccharides Surface Interactions
Graduate students in science or engineering.
Study of fundamental surface science theories as applied to physical and chemical interactions of carbohydrates and polysaccharides.
EBS 270
Modeling & Analysis of Biological & Physical Systems
Familiarity with a programming language.
Mathematical modeling of biological systems: model development; analytical and numerical solutions. Case studies from various specializations within Biological & Agricultural Engineering.
EBS 275
Physical Properties of Biological Materials
Consent of Instructor.
Selected topics on physical properties, such as mechanical, optical, rheological, and aerodynamic properties, as related to the design of harvesting, handling, sorting, and processing equipment. Techniques for measuring and recording physical properties of biological materials.
EBS 289A
Selected Topics in Biological Systems Engineering: Animal Systems Engineering
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Animal Systems Engineering.
EBS 289B
Selected Topics in Biological Systems Engineering: Aquacultural Engineering
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Aquacultural Engineering.
EBS 289C
Selected Topics in Biological Systems Engineering: Biological Engineering
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Biological Engineering.
EBS 289D
Selected Topics in Biological Systems Engineering: Energy Systems
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Energy Systems.
EBS 289E
Selected Topics in Biological Systems Engineering: Environmental Quality
Consent of Instructor.
Special topic in Environmental Quality.
EBS 289F
Selected Topics in Biological Systems Engineering: Food Engineering
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Food Engineering.
EBS 289G
Selected Topics in Biological Systems Engineering: Forest Engineering
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Forest Engineering.
EBS 289H
Selected Topics in Biological Systems Engineering: Irrigation & Drainage
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Irrigation & Drainage.
EBS 289I
Selected Topics in Biological Systems Engineering: Plant Production & Harvest
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Plant Production & Harvest.
EBS 289J
Selected Topics in Biological Systems Engineering: Postharvest Engineering
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Postharvest Engineering.
EBS 289K
Selected Topics in Biological Systems Engineering: Sensors & Actuators
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Sensors & Actuators.
EBS 290
Seminar
Graduate standing.
Weekly seminars on recent advances and selected topics in biological systems engineering. Theme changes from quarter to quarter.
EBS 290C
Graduate Research Conference
Consent of Instructor.
Research problems, progress and techniques in biological systems engineering.
EBS 390
Supervised Teaching in Biological & Agricultural Engineering
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Tutoring and teaching students in undergraduate courses offered in the Department of Biological and Agricultural Engineering. Weekly conferences with instructor; evaluation of teaching. Preparing for and conducting demonstrations, laboratories and discussions. Preparing and grading exams.
ECH 005
Introduction to Analysis & Design in Chemical Engineering
MAT 021A;  MAT 021B (can be concurrent).
Quantitative introduction to the engineering principles of analysis and design. Applications of differential and integral calculus. Laboratory experiments using coffee to illustrate chemical engineering concepts and to conduct an engineering design competition.
ECH 051
Material Balances
MAT 021C C- or better;  MAT 021D (can be concurrent).
Application of the principle of conservation of mass to single and multicomponent systems in chemical process calculations. Studies of batch, semi-batch, and continuous processes involving mass transfer, phase change, and reaction stoichiometry.
ECH 060
Engineering Problem Solving Using MATLAB
MAT 021C.
Problem solving in chemical, biochemical and materials engineering using MATLAB. Programming styles, data structures, working with lists, functions and rules. Applications drawn from material balances, statistics, numerical methods, bioinformatics, transport phenomena, kinetics, and computational analysis.
ECH 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.
Directed Group Study.
ECH 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.
Special Study for Undergraduates
ECH 140
Mathematical Methods in Biochemical & Chemical Engineering 
MAT 022B;  (ECH 060 or ENG 006);  or equivalents of ECH 060 or ENG 006.
Mathematical methods for solving problems in chemical and biochemical engineering, with emphasis on transport phenomena. Fourier series and separation of variables. Sturm-Liouville eigenvalue problems. Similarity transformations. Tensor analysis. Finite difference methods for solving time-dependent diffusion problems. 
ECH 141
Fluid Mechanics for Biochemical & Chemical Engineers 
ECH 051 C- or better;  ECH 140.
Principles and applications of fluid mechanics in chemical and biochemical engineering. Hydrostatics. Stress tensor and Newton's law of viscosity.   
ECH 142
Heat Transfer for Biochemical & Chemical Engineers
ECH 141.
Conduction, convection, and radiation of thermal energy in applications to chemical and biochemical engineering. Derivation of thermal and mechanical energy equations. Thermal boundary layers. Macroscopic balances. Applications: heat transfer in tubes, channels, and integrated circuits, and analysis of heat exchangers.
ECH 143
Mass Transfer for Biochemical & Chemical Engineers
ECH 141.
Derivation of species conservation equations describing convective and diffusive mass transfer. Fick's law and the Stefan-Maxwell constitutive equations. Mass transfer coefficients. Multicomponent mass transfer across gas/liquid interfaces. Applications include drying, heterogeneous chemical reactions, and membrane separations. 
ECH 144
Rheology & Polymer Processing
ECH 141.
Deformation in steady shear, unsteady shear, and elongational flows. Linear and non-linear viscoelastic constitutive models. The principle of material indifference and admissibility of constitutive equations. Introduction to the unit operations of polymer processing.
ECH 145A
Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics Laboratory
ECH 152A;  ECH 152B (can be concurrent).Open to majors in Chemical Engineering, Chemical Engineering/Materials Science, & Biochemical Engineering.
Laboratory experiments in chemical engineering thermodynamics.
ECH 145B
Chemical Engineering Transport Lab
ECH 141;  ECH 145A.Open to majors in Chemical Engineering, Chemical Engineering/Materials Science, & Biochemical Engineering.
Laboratory experiments in chemical engineering transport phenomena.
ECH 148A
Chemical Kinetics & Reaction Engineering
ECH 143;  ECH 152B.
Ideal chemical reactors. Rate laws and stoichiometry. Design and analysis of isothermal reactors with multiple reactions.
ECH 148B
Chemical Kinetics & Reaction Engineering
ECH 148A.
Design and analysis of non-isothermal reactors. Reactions in packed beds with pressure drop. Adsorption and heterogeneous catalysis.  Transport limitations.
ECH 152A
Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics
ECH 060 or ENG 006;  or equivalents.
Application of principles of thermodynamics to chemical processes.  
ECH 152B
Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics
ECH 152A.
Continuation of ECH 152A.
ECH 155
Chemical Engineering Kinetics & Reactor Design Laboratory
ECH 145B;  ECH 148A;  ECH 148B (can be concurrent);  ECH 157 (can be concurrent);  Upper division English composition requirement (can be concurrent).Open to majors in Chemical Engineering, Chemical Engineering/Materials Science, and Biochemical Engineering.
Laboratory experiments in chemical kinetics, reactor design and process control.
ECH 155A
Chemical Engineering Laboratory
ECH 141 (can be concurrent);  ECH 142 (can be concurrent);  ECH 143 (can be concurrent);  Satisfaction of the upper division English composition requirement.Open to majors in Chemical Engineering, Chemical Engineering/Materials Science, Biochemical Engineering, Biomedical Engineering, and Biological Systems Engineering.
Laboratory experiments in transport phenomena, chemical kinetics, and thermodynamics.
ECH 155A
Chemical Engineering Laboratory
ECH 141 (can be concurrent);  ECH 142 (can be concurrent);  ECH 143 (can be concurrent);  Satisfaction of the upper division English composition requirement.Open to majors in Chemical Engineering, Chemical Engineering/Materials Science, Biochemical Engineering, Biomedical Engineering, and Biological Systems Engineering.
Laboratory experiments in transport phenomena, chemical kinetics, and thermodynamics.
ECH 155B
Chemical Engineering  Laboratory
ECH 143 (can be concurrent);  ECH 155A;  Satisfaction of the upper division English composition requirement.Open to majors in Chemical Engineering, Chemical Engineering/Materials Science, Biochemical Engineering, Biomedical Engineering, Food Engineering, and Biosystems Engineering.
Continuation of ECH 155A. Laboratory experiments in transport phenomena, chemical kinetics, and thermodynamics.
ECH 155B
Chemical Engineering  Laboratory
ECH 143 (can be concurrent);  ECH 155A;  Satisfaction of the upper division English composition requirement.Open to majors in Chemical Engineering, Chemical Engineering/Materials Science, Biochemical Engineering, Biomedical Engineering, Food Engineering, and Biosystems Engineering.
Continuation of ECH 155A. Laboratory experiments in transport phenomena, chemical kinetics, and thermodynamics.
ECH 157
Process Dynamics & Control
ECH 140.
Fundamentals of dynamics and modeling of chemical processes. Design and analysis of feedback control of chemical processes.
ECH 158A
Process Economics & Green Design
ECH 142;  ECH 143.
Senior design experience in process and product creation and design with multiple realistic constraints. Cost accounting and capital investment estimation. Profitability analysis techniques. Green chemistry, health risk assessment and life cycle assessment concepts.
ECH 158B
Separations & Unit Operations
ECH 158A.
Senior design experience with multiple realistic constraints. Heuristic and rigorous design of chemical process equipment. Separation by filtration, distillation and extraction. Synthesis of reactor and separation networks, heat and power integration.
ECH 158C
Plant Design Project
ECH 158B or ECH 161C.
Senior design experience for chemical and biochemical processes. Impact of multiple realistic constraints. Design, costing and profitability analysis of complete plants. Use of computer-aided design techniques. 
ECH 160
Fundamentals of Biomanufacturing
MIC 102 or BIS 102 or ABI 102.
Principles of large scale bioreactor production of metabolites, enzymes, and recombinant proteins including the development of strains/cell lines, fermentor/bioreactor design, monitoring and operation, product recovery and purification, and biomanufacturing economics. 
ECH 161A
Biochemical Engineering Fundamentals
ECH 148A.
Biokinetics; bioreactor design and operation; transport phenomena in bioreactors; microbial, plant, and animal cell cultures. 
ECH 161B
Bioseparations
ECH 143.
Product recovery and purification of biochemicals.  Cell disruption, centrifugation, filtration, membrane separations, extraction, and chromatographic separation.
ECH 161C
Biotechnology Facility Design and Regulatory Compliance
(ECH 161A (can be concurrent),  ECH 161B (can be concurrent)) or MCB 263 (can be concurrent);  Course(s) required concurrently.
Design of biotechnology manufacturing facilities. Fermentation and purification equipment, and utility systems. Introduction to current good manufacturing practices, regulatory compliance, and documentation.
ECH 161C
Biotechnology Facility Design & Regulatory Compliance
(ECH 158A,  ECH 161A (can be concurrent),  ECH 161B (can be concurrent)) or DEB 263 (can be concurrent).
Design of biotechnology manufacturing facilities. Fermentation and purification equipment, and utility systems. Introduction to current good manufacturing practices, regulatory compliance, and documentation.
ECH 161L
Bioprocess Engineering Laboratory
(ECH 145B,  ECH 161A,  ECH 161B) or VEN 186 or (BIS 103,  MCB 120L).Pass One restricted to chemical/biochemical engineering majors.
Laboratory experiments in the operation and analysis of bioreactors; determination of oxygen mass transfer coefficients in bioreactors and ion exchange chromatography.
ECH 166
Catalysis
ECH 148A;  and Consent of Instructor.
Principles of catalysis based on an integration of principles of physical, organic, and inorganic chemistry and chemical kinetics and chemical reaction engineering. Catalysis in solution; catalysis by enzymes; catalysis in swellable polymers; catalysis in microscopic cages (zeolites); catalysis on surfaces.
ECH 169
The Design of Cocktails: Applied Thermodynamics & Transport Phenomena in Mixed Drinks
ECH 145B;  ECH 152B;  and Consent of Instructor.Enrollment by permission of instructors only; limited to students over 21 years old.
Scientific and engineering principles underlying the preparation of mixed drinks. Thermodynamics and kinetics of ice crystallization; phase diagram of ethanol-water-ice mixtures; mass transfer of aromatics; solubility of sucrose and carbon dioxide; colloidal behavior of dispersed solids and emulsified oils. Corresponding laboratory experiments testing the effect of design choices on the sensory quality of cocktails.
ECH 170
Introduction to Colloid & Surface Phenomena
CHE 110A.
Introduction to the behavior of surfaces and disperse systems. Fundamentals will be applied to the solution of practical problems in colloid science. Should be of value to engineers, chemists, biologists, soil scientists, and related disciplines. 
ECH 190C
Research Group Conference
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing in Chemical Engineering.
Research group conferences.
ECH 192
Internship in Chemical or Biochemical Engineering
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of a minimum of 84 units; project approval before period of internship.
Supervised work experience in Chemical or Biochemical Engineering.
ECH 198
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Group study.
ECH 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.
Special study.
ECH 206
Biochemical Engineering
MIC 102;  MIC 102L;  BIS 101;  BIS 102;  BIS 103;  MCB 120L;  MCB 200A;  or Consent of Instructor.  FST 205 recommended.
Interaction of chemical engineering, biochemistry, and microbiology. Mathematical representations of microbial systems. Kinetics of growth, death, and metabolism. Continuous fermentation, agitation, mass transfer and scale-up in fermentation systems, product recovery, enzyme technology.
ECH 226
Enzyme Engineering
MIC 102;  MIC 102L;  BIS 102;  BIS 103;  MCB 122;  MCB 120L;  MCB 200A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Application of basic biochemical and engineering principles of practical enzymatic processes. Lectures cover large scale production and separation of enzymes, immobilized enzyme systems, enzyme related biotechnology, reactor design and optimization, and new application of enzymes in genetic engineering.
ECH 245
Micro- & Nano-Technology in Life Sciences
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Survey of biodevice design from engineering and biological perspectives; micro-/nano-fabrication techniques; surface science and mass transport; essential biological processes and models; proposal development skills on merging aforementioned themes.
ECH 246
Advanced Biochemical Engineering
ECH 206;  or Consent of Instructor.
Advances in the field of biotechnology including genetic engineering, enzyme engineering, fermentation science, and renewable resources development. The important results of original research will be evaluated for understanding of the fundamental principles and for potential practical application.
ECH 252
Statistical Thermodynamics
ECH 152B;  ENG 105B or the equivalent.
A treatment of the statistical basis of thermodynamics;introduction to statistical mechanics; discussion of the laws of thermodynamics; application of thermodynamic relationships to phase and chemical reaction equilibrium; introduction to molecular simulations and the evaluation of thermodynamic properties from molecular simulations.
ECH 253A
Advanced Fluid Mechanics
ECH 141;  ECH 259.
Kinematics and basic principles of fluid flow.  Principles of constitutive equations.  Navier-Stokes equations for Newtonian fluids.  Survey of rectilinear creeping flow, lubrication flow and boundary layer theory.  
ECH 253B
Advanced Heat Transport
ECH 142;  ECH 259;  Or the equivalent.
Fundamental energy postulates and derivation of microscopic and macroscopic energy equations. Mechanisms of conduction.  Isotropic, thermoelastic and anisotropic materials solution problems using Greens functions and perturbation theory.  
ECH 253C
Advanced Mass Transfer
ECH 253A;  Or the equivalent.
Kinematics and basic conservation principles for multicomponent systems. Constitutive equations for momentum, heat and mass transfer, applications to binary and ternary systems. Details of diffusion with reaction, and the effects of concentration.
ECH 254
Colloid & Surface Phenomena
Graduate standing in science or engineering or consent of instructor.
Thermodynamics and rate processes at interfaces. These fundamental processes will be applied to determine the collective propertiesof thin films and membranes, self-assembled systems, liquid crystals and colloidal systems. Experimental techniques in surface analysis.
ECH 256
Chemical Kinetics & Reaction Engineering
ECH 146;  Or the equivalent.
Analysis of the performance of chemical reactors and design of chemical reactors based on the principles of chemical kinetics and transport phenomena. Consideration of noncatalytic/catalytic reactions in single fluid phases and emphasis on reactions in multiphase mixtures, especially gas-solid reactors.
ECH 259
Advanced Engineering Mathematics
MAT 021D;  MAT 022A;  MAT 022B.
Applications of methods of applied mathematics to the analytical and numerical solution of linear and nonlinear ordinary and partial differential equations arising in the study of transport phenomena.
ECH 261
Molecular Modelling of Soft & Biological Matter
EMS 247 or ECH 252;  or equivalent course in advanced thermodynamics/statistical mechanics.
Modern molecular simulation techniques with a focus on soft matter like polymers, biologically relevant systems, and glasses.
ECH 262
Transport Phenomena in Multiphase Systems
ECH 253C.
Heat, mass and momentum transfer in multiphase, multicomponent systems with special emphasis on transport processes in porous media. Derivation of the averaging theorem and application of the method of volume averaging to multicomponent, reacting systems. 
ECH 263
Rheology & Mechanics of Non-Newtonian Fluids
ECH 253A;  ECH 259;  or Consent of Instructor.
Mechanics of polymer solutions and suspension, especially the development of properly invariant constitutive equations. Topics include: viscometry, linear and nonlinear viscoelasticity, continuum mechanics, kinetic theory.
ECH 265
Emulsions, Microemulsions & Bilayers
An undergraduate course in physical chemistry.
Thermodynamic and mechanical descriptions of surfactant-laden interfaces. Forces between and within interfaces. Physics of micelle and microemulsion formation. Structure and stability of emulsions. Properties of phospholipid bilayers, with emphasis on vesicles.
ECH 267
Advanced Process Control
ECH 157;  Or the equivalent.
Advanced course in analysis and synthesis of linear multivariable systems. Emphasis on frequency domain techniques and applications to chemical processes. Topics include singular value analysis, internal model control, robust controller design methods as well as self-tuning control techniques.
ECH 268
Polysaccharides Surface Interactions
Graduate students in science or engineering.
Study of fundamental surface science theories as applied to physical and chemical interactions of carbohydrates and polysaccharides.
ECH 269
Cell & Molecular Biophysics for Bioengineers
BIM 284;  or equivalent; graduate standing; undergraduate students by consent of instructor.
Introduction to fundamental mechanisms governing the structure, function, and assembly of bio-macromolecules. Emphasis is on a quantitative understanding of the nano-to-microscale interactions between and within individual molecules, as well as of their assemblies, in particular membranes.
ECH 289A
Special Topics in Chemical Engineering: Fluid Mechanics
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Fluid Mechanics.
ECH 289B
Special Topics in Chemical Engineering: Nonlinear Analysis & Numerical Methods
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Nonlinear Analysis and Numerical Methods.
ECH 289C
Special Topics in Chemical Engineering: Process Control
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Process Control.
ECH 289D
Special Topics in Chemical Engineering: Chemistry of Catalytic Processes
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Chemistry of Catalytic Processes.
ECH 289E
Special Topics in Chemical Engineering: Biotechnology
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Biotechnology.
ECH 289F
Special Topics in Chemical Engineering: Interfacial Engineering
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Interfacial Engineering.
ECH 289G
Special Topics in Chemical Engineering: Molecular Thermodynamics
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Molecular Thermodynamics.
ECH 289H
Special Topics in Chemical Engineering: Membrane Separations
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Membrane Separations.
ECH 289I
Special Topics in Chemical Engineering: Advanced Materials Processing
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Advanced Materials Processing.
ECH 289J
Special Topics in Chemical Engineering: Novel Experimental Methods
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Novel Experimental Methods.
ECH 289K
Special Topics in Chemical Engineering: Advanced Transport Phenomena
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Advanced Transport Phenomena.
ECH 289L
Special Topics in Chemical Engineering: Biomolecular Engineering
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Biomolecular Engineering.
ECH 290C
Graduate Research Group Conference
Consent of Instructor.
Research problems, progress and techniques in chemical engineering.
ECH 294
Current Progress in Biotechnology
Graduate standing.
Seminars presented by guest lecturers on subjects of their own research activities.
ECH 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Group study.
ECH 390
Teaching of Chemical Engineering
Consent of Instructor.  Qualifications and acceptance as teaching assistant and/or associate-in in chemical engineering.
Participation as a teaching assistant or associate-in in a designated engineering course. Methods of leading discussion groups or laboratory sections, writing and grading quizzes, use of laboratory equipment, and grading laboratory reports.
ECI 003
Civil Infrastructure & Society 
MAT 021A (can be concurrent).Pass One restricted to lower division students; Civil Engineering majors.
Introduction to civil infrastructure and its relationship with society and the natural environment. Exposure to innovative research on civil engineering and environmental systems. Participation in laboratory experiments illustrative of the solution of representative but simplified engineering problems.
ECI 019
C Programming for Civil & Environmental Engineers
MAT 021A (can be concurrent).Pass One open to Civil Engineering majors and Optical Science and Engineering majors.
Computational problem solving techniques for Civil & Environmental Engineering applications using structured C programming. Algorithm design applied to realistic problems.  
ECI 019
C Programming for Civil & Environmental Engineers
MAT 021A (can be concurrent).Pass One open to Civil Engineering majors and Optical Science and Engineering majors.
Computational problem solving techniques for Civil and Environmental Engineering applications using structured C programming. Algorithm design applied to realistic problems.  
ECI 040
Introduction to Environmental Engineering
CHE 002B.Pass One open to students in the College of Engineering.
Introduction to topics in environmental engineering; discussion on influence of literary work, art, and media on the evolution of environmental engineering practice, relevant laws, and regulations; presentations of historical case studies.
ECI 090X
Lower Division Seminar
Consent of Instructor.
Examination of a special topic in a small group setting.
ECI 092
Internship for Engineering
Lower division standing; approval of project prior to period of internship.
Supervised work experience in civil engineering.
ECI 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.

ECI 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.

ECI 100
Introduction to Fluid Mechanics for Civil & Environmental Engineers
ENG 035 C-  or better;  MAT 022B C- or better;  PHY 009B C-  or better.Pass One restricted to Civil Engineering, Environmental Engineering and Hydrology majors.
Fluid flow in civil & environmental engineering, basis for design, buoyancy, hydrostatics, gravity dams, hydraulic modeling: similarity & scaling, conservation laws, flow in bends, nozzles, pipes, pumps, turbines, complimentary lab experiments.
ECI 114
Probabilistic Systems Analysis for Civil Engineers
MAT 021C C- or better.
Probabilistic concepts and models in engineering. Statistical analysis of engineering experimental and field data. Introduction to stochastic processes and models of engineering systems.
ECI 115
Computer Methods in Civil & Environmental Engineering
(ENG 006 or ECS 030);  MAT 022B.Open to Civil Engineering majors only.
Presentation, implementation and application of numerical algorithms and computer models for the solution of practical problems in Civil and Environmental Engineering. 
ECI 115
Computer Methods in Civil & Environmental Engineering
(ENG 006 C- or better or ECS 030 C- or better or ECS 032A C- or better);  (MAT 022B C- or better or MAT 027B C- or better).Open to Civil Engineering majors only.
Presentation, implementation and application of numerical algorithms and computer models for the solution of practical problems in Civil and Environmental Engineering. 
ECI 119
Parallel Processing for Engineering Applications.  
C programming or consent of instructor.
Fundamental skills in parallel computing for engineering applications; emphasis on structured parallel programming for distributed memory parallel clusters.
ECI 119
Parallel Processing for Engineering Applications.  
C programming or consent of instructor.
Fundamental skills in parallel computing for engineering applications; emphasis on structured parallel programming for distributed memory parallel clusters.
ECI 123
Urban Systems & Sustainability
Upper division standing.
Systems-level approach of how to evaluate and then modify sustainability of urban systems based on interaction with natural environments. Topics include: definition/metrics of urban sustainability; system analyses of urban systems; enabling technology, policies, legislation; measures and modification of ecological footprints.
ECI 125
Building Energy Performance
Upper division standing in Engineering.Open to students in the College of Engineering.
Mechanisms of energy consumption in buildings including end uses, thermal loads, ventilation, air infiltration, thermal energy distribution, and HVAC systems; energy performance simulation; methods and strategies of energy efficiency.
ECI 130
Structural Analysis
ENG 104 C- or better;  MAT 022A.Open to Civil Engineering majors. 
Elastic structural analysis of determinate and indeterminate trusses, beams and frames. Plastic bending and limit analysis.
ECI 130
Structural Analysis
ENG 104 C- or better;  (MAT 022A or MAT 027A).Open to Civil Engineering majors. 
Elastic structural analysis of determinate and indeterminate trusses, beams and frames. Plastic bending and limit analysis.
ECI 131
Matrix Structural Analysis
ENG 104 C- or better;  ENG 006.Open to Engineering majors only.
Matrix formulation and computer analysis of statically indeterminate structures. Stiffness and flexibility formulations for elastic structures. Finite element methods for elasticity and bending problems.
ECI 132
Structural Design: Metallic Elements
ECI 130 C- or better.
Design of metallic beams, columns, and other members for various types of loading and boundary conditions; design of connections between members; member performance within structural systems.
ECI 135
Structural Design:  Concrete Elements
ECI 130 C- or better.Restricted to Civil Engineering, Civil Engineering/Materials Science and Engineering, and Materials Science and Engineering majors only.
Strength design procedures for columns, rectangular beams, T-beams and beams of general cross-section. Building code requirements for bending, shear, axial load, combined stresses and bond. Introduction to prestressed concrete.
ECI 136
Building Design
(ECI 130 C- or better or ECI 131 C- or better);  (ECI 135 or ECI 132).
Design of a building structure for a specific need under the multiple constraints of safety, serviceability, cost and aesthetics.
ECI 138
Earthquake Loads on Structures
ECI 130 C- or better or ECI 131 C- or better.
Determination of loads on structures due to earthquakes. Methods of estimating equivalent static lateral forces; response spectrum and time history analysis. Concepts of mass, damping and stiffness for typical structures. Design for inelastic behavior. Numerical solutions and Code requirements.
ECI 139
Advanced Structural Mechanics
ENG 104 C- or better.
Review of stress, strain, equilibrium, compatibility, and elastic material behavior. Plane stress and plane strain problems in elasticity; energy methods. Theories for unsymmetric bending, straight and curved beams. Beams on elastic foundations; stresses in plates and shells; elastic stability.
ECI 140A
Environmental Analysis of Aqueous Systems
CHE 002B C- or better.Pass One restricted to Environmental Engineering majors. 
Introduction to "wet chemical" and instrumental techniques commonly used in the examination of water and wastewater and associated data analysis.
ECI 140A
Environmental Analysis of Aqueous Systems
CHE 002B C- or better;  ECI 040 (can be concurrent).Pass One restricted to Environmental Engineering majors. 
Introduction to "wet chemical" and instrumental techniques commonly used in the examination of water and wastewater and associated data analysis.
ECI 140B
Chemical Principles for Environmental Engineers
CHE 002B C- or better.
Aqueous chemistry; equilibrium relationships; carbonate system; thermodynamics; kinetics & rate laws; precipitation, adsorption, & volatilization phenomenon; oxidation & reduction reactions; pH, pE and predominance diagrams; organic chemicals.
ECI 140C
Biological Principles for Environmental Engineering
ECI 140A C- or better or ECI 140B C- or better.
Fundamental microbiology concepts for environmental engineers; provides background needed for the application of water and wastewater treatment, bioremediation, air pollution control and biotransformations in environmental engineered systems. 
ECI 140C
Biological Principles for Environmental Engineering
(ECI 140A C- or better or ECI 140B C- or better);  ECI 040.
Fundamental microbiology concepts for environmental engineers; provides background needed for the application of water and wastewater treatment, bioremediation, air pollution control and biotransformations in environmental engineered systems. 
ECI 140D
Water and Wastewater Treatment System Design
(ENG 103 C- or better or ECI 100 C- or better);  (ECI 140 C- or better or ECI 140A C- or better or ECI 140B C- or better or ECI 140C C- or better or ECI 148A C- or better).
Evaluation and design of water and wastewater treatment systems. 
ECI 140D
Water & Wastewater Treatment System Design
(ENG 103 C- or better or ECI 100 C- or better);  (ECI 140 C- or better or ECI 140A C- or better or ECI 140B C- or better or ECI 140C C- or better or ECI 148A C- or better);  ECI 040.
Evaluation and design of water and wastewater treatment systems. 
ECI 141
Engineering Hydraulics
ENG 103 C- or better or ECI 100 C- or better.
Nature of flow of a real fluid; flow in pipes; open channel flow; turbomachinery; fluid forces on objects: boundary layers, lift and drag.
ECI 141L
Engineering Hydraulics Laboratory
ECI 141 (can be concurrent).Open to Engineering students only.
Laboratory experiments and demonstrations on flow measurements, sluice gates, hydraulic jump, flow characteristics, and centrifugal pumps.
ECI 142
Engineering Hydrology
ECI 141 (can be concurrent).Restricted to students in the College of Engineering.
The hydrologic cycle. Evapotranspiration, interception, depression storage and infiltration. Streamflow analysis and modeling. Flood routing through channels and reservoirs. Frequency analysis of hydrologic variables. Precipitation analysis for hydrologic design. Hydrologic design.
ECI 143
Green Engineering Design & Sustainability
Upper division standing.Restricted to upper division standing; Pass One restricted to Civil Engineering majors.
Application of concepts, goals and metrics of sustainability, green engineering and industrial ecology to engineering design. Other topics include life-cycle assessments, analysis of environmental management systems, and economics of pollution prevention and sustainability.
ECI 144
Groundwater Systems Design
ECI 141.
Groundwater occurrence, distribution, and movement; groundwater flow systems; radial flow to wells and aquifer testing; aquifer management; groundwater contamination; solute transport by groundwater; fate and transport of subsurface contaminants.  Groundwater supply and transport modeling.
ECI 144L
Groundwater Systems Design Laboratory
ECI 144 (can be concurrent);  ECI 144 required concurrently.
Computer modeling of groundwater flow under regional gradient, well injection/withdrawal, and natural and engineered boundary conditions.  Use of Groundwater Vistas computer program.
ECI 145
Hydraulic Structure Design
ECI 141 C- or better.
Project-based course on the design of an integrated urban drainage system with focus on consideration of design alternatives, multiple realistic constraints, quantification of uncertainty, codes and standards, technical drawing and cost analysis. 
ECI 146
Water Resources Simulation
ENG 103 C- or better or ECI 100 C- or better.
Computer simulation techniques in the analysis, design and operation of surface water systems; modeling concepts and practices with application to surface runoff; water quality in rivers and streams and dispersion of contaminants in water bodies.
ECI 148A
Water Quality Management
CHE 002B C- or better.
Basic concepts of water quality measurements and regulations. Introduction to physical, biological and chemical processes in natural waters. Fundamentals of mass balances in water and wastewater treatment.
ECI 149
Air Pollution
MAT 021D;  MAT 022B;  CHE 002B C- or better;  (ATM 121A or ENG 103 C- or better or ECI 100 C- or better).
Physical and technical aspects of air pollution. Emphasis on geophysical processes and air pollution meteorology as well as physical and chemical properties of pollutants.
ECI 150
Air Pollution Control System Design
ECI 149 C- or better or ATM 149 C- or better.
Design and evaluation of air pollution control devices and systems.
ECI 153
Deterministic Optimization & Design
MAT 021C;  MAT 022A;  computer programming course.
Operations research. Optimization techniques such as linear programming, dynamic programming, and non-linear programming. Applications in civil engineering disciplines, including multiple realistic constraints, through computer-based course projects.
ECI 153
Deterministic Optimization & Design
MAT 021C;  (MAT 022A or MAT 027A);  computer programming course.
Operations research. Optimization techniques such as linear programming, dynamic programming, and non-linear programming. Applications in civil engineering disciplines, including multiple realistic constraints, through computer-based course projects.
ECI 155
Water Resources Engineering Planning
(ENG 106 or ECN 001A or ECN 001AV);  ECI 114.
Basic engineering planning concepts; role of engineering, economic, environmental and social information and analysis; institutional, political and legal aspects. Case studies and computer models illustrate the planning of water resource systems.
ECI 161
Transportation System Operations
MAT 021C C- or better;  PHY 009A C- or better.
Principles of transportation system operations; traffic characteristics and methods of measurement; models of transportation operations and congestion applied to urban streets and freeways.
ECI 163
Energy & Environmental Aspects of Transportation
ECN 001A or ECN 001AV or ENG 106.
Engineering, economic, and systems planning concepts. Analysis and evaluation of energy, air quality and selected environmental attributes of transportation technologies. Strategies for reducing pollution and petroleum consumption in light of institutional and political constraints. Evaluation of vehicle emission models.
ECI 171
Soil Mechanics
(ENG 103 (can be concurrent) or ECI 100 (can be concurrent));  ENG 104 C- or better;  ECI 171L (can be concurrent);  ECI 171L required concurrently.Restricted to Civil Engineering and Environmental Engineering majors only.
Soil formations, mass-volume relationships, soil classification, effective stress, soil-water-void relationships, compaction, seepage, capillarity, compressibility, consolidation, strength, states of stress and failure, lateral earth pressures, and slope stability.
ECI 171L
Soil Mechanics Laboratory
ECI 171 (can be concurrent);  ECI 171 required concurrently.
Laboratory studies utilizing standard testing methods to determine physical, mechanical and hydraulic properties of soil and demonstration of basic principles of soil behavior.
ECI 173
Foundation Design
ECI 171.
Foundation analysis and design, including site characterization, evaluation of shallow and deep foundation alternatives, evaluation of bearing capacity and settlements, design of retaining structures, and case-based design experiences.
ECI 175
Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering
ECI 171 C- or better.
Tectonics, faults, site response, and probabilistic ground motion prediction equations. Cyclic loading and liquefaction of soil elements and layers. Empirical procedures and field tests for evaluation of triggering and consequences, of liquefaction. 
ECI 179
Pavement Engineering
ENG 104 C- or better.
Pavement types (rigid, flexible, unsurfaced, rail), their applications (roads, airfields, ports, rail) and distress mechanisms. Materials, traffic and environment characterization. Empirical and mechanistic-empirical design procedures. Maintenance, rehabilitation and reconstruction; construction quality; asphalt concrete mix design.
ECI 189A
Selected Topics in Civil Engineering: Environmental Engineering
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study in Environmental Engineering.
ECI 189B
Selected Topics in Civil Engineering: Hydraulics & Hydrologic Engineering
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study in Hydraulics & Hydrologic Engineering.
ECI 189C
Selected Topics in Civil Engineering: Engineering Planning
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study in Engineering Planning.
ECI 189D
Selected Topics in Civil Engineering: Geotechnical Engineering
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study in Geotechnical Engineering.
ECI 189E
Selected Topics in Civil Engineering: Structural Engineering
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study in Structural Engineering.
ECI 189F
Selected Topics in Civil Engineering: Structural Mechanics
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study in Structural Mechanics.
ECI 189G
Selected Topics in Civil Engineering: Transportation Engineering
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study in Transportation Engineering.
ECI 189H
Selected Topics in Civil Engineering: Transportation Planning
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study in Transportation Planning.
ECI 189I
Selected Topics in Civil Engineering: Water Resources Engineering
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study in Water Resources Engineering.
ECI 189J
Selected Topics in Civil Engineering: Water Resources Planning
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study in Water Resources Planning.
ECI 190C
Research Group Conferences in Civil & Environmental Engineering
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing in Civil and Environmental Engineering.
Research group conferences.
ECI 192
Internship in Engineering
Upper division standing; approval of project prior to the period of the internship.
Supervised work experience in civil engineering.
ECI 193A
Civil & Environmental Engineering Senior Design 
(ECI 140D C- or better) or (ECI 171 C- or better,  ECI 171L C- or better) or (ECI 132 C- or better or ECI 135 C- or better) or (ECI 161 C- or better or ECI 163 C- or better) or (ECI 141 C- or better,  ECI 141L C- or better);  and Consent of Instructor.  One other ECI major depth course with a C- or better; students must be in their final year of study.Open to seniors in Civil Engineering and Environmental Engineering only.
Culminating design experience for civil engineering and environmental engineering majors. Student teams work closely with faculty, city officials or consulting clients to propose, implement and validate a unique solution to a real-world problem. 
ECI 193B
Civil & Environmental Engineering Senior Design
ECI 193A.Open to seniors in Civil Engineering and Environmental Engineering only.
Culminating design experience for civil engineering and environmental engineering majors. Student teams work closely with faculty, city officials or consulting clients to propose, implement and validate a unique solution to a real-world problem. 
ECI 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

ECI 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.
Special study.
ECI 201
Introduction to Theory of Elasticity
ENG 104.
Fundamental equations of elasticity in three dimensions; plane stress and plane strain; flexture and torsion of bars of various shapes. Introduction to variational and approximate methods.
ECI 203
Inelastic Behavior of Solids
ECI 201.
Fundamentals of theories of plasticity, viscoelasticity and viscoplasticity for solids. Macroscopic constitutive modelling for engineering materials, e.g., metals, polymers, soils, etc., and microscopic motivation.
ECI 205
Continuum Mechanics
ECI 201.
Tensor formulation of the field equations for continuum mechanics, including large deformation effects. Invariance and symmetry requirements. Introduction to nonlinear thermoelasticity and thermodynamics. Solution of three-dimensional problems. Selected topics.
ECI 205
Continuum Mechanics
ECI 201.
Tensor formulation of the field equations for continuum mechanics, including large deformation effects. Invariance and symmetry requirements. Introduction to nonlinear thermoelasticity and thermodynamics. Solution of three-dimensional problems. Selected topics.
ECI 206
Fracture Mechanics
ECI 201;  ENG 104.
Linear and nonlinear fracture mechanics, stress analysis, energy concepts, brittle fracture criteria, path independent integrals, Dugdale-Barenblatt model, general cohesive zone models, ductile fracture criteria, crack tip fields for stationary and propagating cracks, fatigue.  Application of numerical methods for fracture mechanics.
ECI 211
Advanced Matrix Structural Analysis
ECI 131.
Analysis of complex frameworks by the displacement method; treatment of tapered beams, curved beams, and beams on elastic foundations; partially rigid connections; geometric and material nonlinearities; buckling; flexibility-based formulations; FEM-software for nonlinear analysis of structures.
ECI 212A
Finite Element Procedures in Applied Mechanics
EAD 115 or (MAT 128A,  MAT 128B (can be concurrent)).
Weighted-residual and Rayleigh-Ritz methods.  Weak/variational formulation and development of discrete equations using finite element approximations.  Application to one- and two-dimensional problems (heat conduction).
ECI 212B
Finite Elements: Application to Linear & Non-Linear Structural Mechanics Problems
ECI 212A.
Application to linear and nonlinear structural mechanics problems. Linear elasticity, weak form, and finite element approximation.  Incompressible media problems. Non-linear problems with material nonlinearity. 
ECI 213
Analysis of Structures Subjected to Dynamic Loads
ECI 211 (can be concurrent).
Analysis of structures subjected to earthquake, wind and blast loading; distributed, consistent and lumped mass techniques; computer implementation; nonlinear response spectrum; frequency and time domain analysis; seismic protection of structures; numerical methods in linear and nonlinear structural dynamics.
ECI 216
Meshfree Methods & Partition of Unity Finite Elements 
ECI 201;  ECI 212A.
Advanced discretization techniques such as meshfree methods and partition of unity finite elements for the Galerkin solution of boundary-value problems in solid and structural mechanics. Application of meshfree and extended finite element methods in computational fracture.
ECI 221
Theory of Plates & Introduction to Shells
ECI 201 (can be concurrent).
Development of classical and refined plate theories. Application to isotropic, orthotropic and composite plates. Solutions for rectangular and circular plates. Membrane theory for axisymmetric shells and bending of circular shells.
ECI 223
Advanced Dynamics, Signal Processing, & Smart Structures Technology
ECI 213;  Or equivalent.
Signal processing and system identification of structures under dynamic excitations; Fourier and Laplace transforms; data acquisition and sensor design fundamentals; sensor technologies/techniques for nondestructive evaluation; structural control; actuators and dampers for smart structures; piezoelectrics and acoustic emissions; micro- and nano-fabrication.
ECI 232
Advanced Topics in Concrete Structures
ECI 130;  ECI 135;  ECI 138;  Graduate standing.
Ductility of reinforced concrete; strength of two-way slabs; modified compression field theory.
ECI 233
Advanced Design of Steel Structures
(ECI 130 or ECI 131);  ECI 132.
Review of Load and Resistance Factor Design (LRFD); steel-plate girder design; plastic design of indeterminate systems; moment frames and bracing systems; connection design; seismic design of steel structures; vibration of flooring systems; steel-concrete composite design.
ECI 234
Prestressed Concrete
ECI 135;  (ECI 130 or ECI 131).
Survey of methods and applications; prestressing materials and systems; prestress losses; flexural design; design for shear and torsion; deflection computation and control; continuous beams and indeterminate structures; floor systems; partial prestressing; design of compression members; strut-and-tie models.
ECI 235
Cement Composites
ENG 104.
Applications of cement composites; materials selection and proportioning; component and composite properties; hydration reactions and microstructure development; mechanisms of failure; nondestructive test methods; fiber reinforcement; concrete durability; novel reinforcing materials; ferrocement; repair and retrofit technologies; applications to structural design.
ECI 236
Design of Fiber Reinforced Polymer Composite Structures
ECI 135.
Basics of mechanics and design of polymer matrix composites: composite classification, manufacturing process, micromechanical property determination, classical lamination theory, strength theories, first-ply-failure, test methods, design practice, strengthening and retrofitting of existing reinforced concrete structures.
ECI 237
Bridge Design
ECI 130;  ECI 135;  ECI 234 recommended.Open to Graduate Students only.
Bridge types, behavior and construction characteristics; design philosophy, details according to Caltrans and American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials codes, principles; seismic design and retrofit of concrete bridges; modern bridges using advanced fiber reinforced polymer composites; fieldtrip required.
ECI 238
Performance-Based Seismic Engineering
ECI 138;  ECI 213.
Modern seismic design; performance-based seismic design; seismic hazard; seismic demands: linear and nonlinear procedures; performance assessment: deterministic and probabilistic procedure; review of FEMA-350, FEMA-356, ATC-40 and other performance-based guidelines.
ECI 239
Design of Materials & Systems for Sustainability
ENG 104 C or better;  or Consent of Instructor.Restricted to Graduate Students.
Effects on environmental impacts from materials selection and design in the built environment. Material mechanics, design constraints, and life cycle assessment in the development of greener materials and systems. Design of engineered materials through selecting constituents & processing techniques and the influence on mechanical properties, microstructure, and environmental impacts. Role of materials in the environmental impacts of buildings, infrastructure, and other systems.
ECI 240
Water Quality
ECI 141;  ECI 142.
Quality requirements for beneficial uses of water. Hydrologic cycle of quality. Hydromechanics in relation to quality of surface and groundwaters; transport and fate of waterborne pollutants. Heatbudget for surface waters; predictive methods; introduction to water quality modeling.
ECI 241
Environmental Reactive Chemical Transport Modeling
CHE 002A or CHE 002B or ECI 149;  Or equivalent.
Modeling of reactive chemical transport in air and water including kinetic reactions, equilibrium reactions, and phase partitioning. Emphasis on numerical solution schemes and programming techniques to provide deeper insight into model performance and limitations.
ECI 242
Air Quality
ENG 105;  ECI 141;  ECI 149;  Or equivalents.
Factors determining air quality. Effects of air pollutants. Physical and chemical fundamentals of atmospheric transport and reaction. Introduction to dispersion modeling.  
ECI 243A
Water & Waste Treatment
ECI 148A;  Or the equivalent.Open to Graduate majors only.
Characteristics of water and airborne wastes; treatment processes and process kinetics; treatment system design.
ECI 243B
Water & Waste Treatment
ECI 243A.Open to graduate majors only.
Continuation of ECI 243A. Aeration, thickening, biological processes, design of biological treatment systems.
ECI 243L
Pilot Plant Laboratory
ECI 243A;  ECI 243B (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.Open to graduate majors only.
Laboratory investigation of physical, chemical, and biological processes for water and wastewater treatment.
ECI 245A
Applied Environmental Chemistry: Inorganic
ENG 105;  ECI 140;  CHE 002B;  Or the equivalent of CHE 002B; CHE 002C or CHE 107A recommended.
Chemistry of natural and polluted waters. Topics include chemical, kinetic and equilibrium principles, redox reactions, gas solution and solid-solution equilibria, thermodynamics, carbonate systems, coordination chemistry, interfacial phenomena.
ECI 245B
Applied Environmental Chemistry: Organic
CHE 128A;  CHE 128B;  CHE 128C;  Or the equivalent; CHE 002C or CHE 107A recommended.
Transport and transformation of organic chemicals in the environment.Topics include application of thermodynamics to predict solubility and activity coefficients; distribution of organic chemicals between the aqueous phase and air, solvent, or solid phases; chemical, photochemical and biological transformation reactions.
ECI 247
Aerosols
ENG 103;  ENG 105;  ECI 141;  ECI 149.
Behavior of airborne particles including particle formation, modification, and removal processes.  
ECI 247L
Aerosols Laboratory
ECI 247.
Methods of generation and characterization of aerosols. Detailed topics may include flow rate measurement, aerosol generation, aerosol collection, ions measurement, metals measurement, and carbon measurement.
ECI 248
Biofilm Processes
SSC 111 or SSC 211 or ECI 243B;  or Consent of Instructor.  Calculus and basic cell molecular biology are recommended.
Natural and engineered biofilms, including biofilm occurrence and development, spatial structure, microbial processes, fundamental and applied research tools, biofilm reactors, beneficial uses, and detrimental effects.
ECI 249
Probabilistic Design & Optimization
ECI 114;  ECI 153;  ENG 106;  Or equivalents.
Design by optimization for probabilistic systems, decision theory, the value of information, probabilistic linear programming, probabilistic dynamic programming, nonlinear probabilistic optimization. Applications in civil engineering design, project evaluation, and risk management.
ECI 250
Civil Infrastructure System Optimization & Identification
MAT 021C;  MAT 022A;  Programming course; EAD 115 and mathematical modeling course recommended.Restricted to graduate standing.
Applied mathematics with a focus on modeling, identifying, and controlling dynamic, stochastic, and underdetermined systems. Applications in transportation networks, water resource planning, and other civil infrastructure systems. 
ECI 251
Transportation Demand Analysis
ECI 114;  Or the equivalent.
Procedures used in urban travel demand forecasting. Principles and assumptions of model components (trip generation, trip distribution, model split). New methods of estimating travel demand. Computer exercises using empirical data to calibrate models and forecast travel demand.
ECI 253
Dynamic Programming & Multistage Decision Processes
MAT 021C;  MAT 022A;  Programming course; EAD 115 recommended.
Operations research. Optimization techniques with a focus on dynamic programming in treating deterministic, stochastic, and adaptive multistage decision processes. Brief review of linear programming and non-linear programming. Applications in transportation networks and other civil infrastructure systems.
ECI 256
Urban Traffic Management & Control
ECI 114.
Basic concepts, models, and methods related to the branch of traffic science that deals with the movement of vehicles on a road network, including travel speed, travel time, congestion concepts, car-following and hydrodynamic traffic models.
ECI 257
Flow in Transportation Networks
ECI 153;  ECI 161 or ECI 256 recommended.
Elements of graph theory, a survey of pertinent optimization techniques, extremal principles in network flow problems, deterministic equilibrium assignment, stochastic equilibrium assignment, extensions of equilibrium assignments and dynamic transportation network assignment.
ECI 259
Asphalt & Asphalt Mixes
ECI 179;  or Consent of Instructor.
Asphalts and asphalt mix types and their use in civil engineering structures, with primary emphasis on pavements. Asphalt, aggregate properties and effects on mix properties. Design, construction, recycling. Recent developments and research.
ECI 260
Sediment Transport
ECI 141;  Or equivalent.
Sediment transport in hydrologic systems. Process-oriented course which will emphasize how sediment moves and the physical processes that affect sediment transport. Field trip.
ECI 261
Colloids in Soil & Water
CHE 002B;  (ENG 103 or ECI 100);  Upper division or graduate standing.Pass One restricted to graduate standing; Pass Two restricted to upper division standing or graduate standing.
Colloid occurrence, properties, behavior in different environments, and transport mechanisms in water and soils. Emphasis on their role in water contamination.
ECI 264A
Transport, Mixing & Water Quality in River & Lakes
ECI 141;  ECI 240.
Principal causes of mixing and transport in rivers, lakes and reservoirs, and their impacts on water quality. Case studies of specific lakes and rivers.
ECI 264B
Transport, Mixing & Water Quality in Estuaries & Wetlands
ECI 141;  ECI 240.
Principal causes of mixing and transport in estuaries and wetlands, and their impacts on water quality. Topics include advection/diffusion; tides; transverse mixing; longitudinal dispersion; sediment transport; nutrient cycling; computer modeling of estuaries. Case studies of specific systems.
ECI 265
Stochastic Hydrology & Hydraulics
ECI 266;  or Consent of Instructor.
Physics-based stochastic methods in modeling hydrologic and hydraulic processes; theory for modeling hydrologic-hydraulic governing equations as stochastic partial differential equations applied to various hydrologic-hydraulic processes under uncertainty, including transport, open channel flow, overland flow, soil water flow, and groundwater.
ECI 266
Applied Stochastic Methods in Engineering
ECI 114 or MAT 131 or STA 130A or STA 131A or MAT 118A (can be concurrent).
Stochastic processes classification; Gaussian random fields; stochastic calculus in mean square; Ito and Stratonovich stochastic differential equations; Fokker-Planck equation; stochastic differential equationswith random coefficients.
ECI 267
Water Resource Management
ECI 114;  ECI 141;  ECI 142;  ECI 153 recommended.
Engineering, institutional, economic, and social basis for managing local and regional water resources. Examples in the context of California's water development and management. Uses of computer modeling to improve water management.
ECI 268
Infrastructure Economics
(ECN 001A or ECN 001AV);  ENG 106;  Or the equivalent.
Economics applied to infrastructure engineering  planning, operations, maintenance, and management problems; microeconomic and macroeconomic theories; benefit-cost analysis; effect of uncertainty; optimization economics; non-classical economics; public finance.
ECI 269
Transportation-Air Quality: Theory & Practice
ECI 149;  Or the equivalent.
Health and regulatory aspects of airborne pollutants. Principles of modeling vehicle emissions. Conformity issues and the regulatory framework. Regional and micro-scale modeling.
ECI 270
Advanced Water Resources Management
ECI 153;  ECI 267;  Or the equivalent.
Discussion of technical papers related to planning theory, system maintenance, regionalization, multi-objective methods, risk analysis, institutional issues, pricing model application, economic development, forecasting, operations, and other topics.
ECI 271
Inverse Problems
ECI 114;  ECI 144;  Or equivalents.
Inverse calibration of distributed parameter models, using data representing model outputs. Forward and inverse mappings, stability, uniqueness, identifiability. Optimization formulation of inverse problems, maximum likelihood and other objective functions, indirect and direct approaches, solution by UCODE in hands-on project format.
ECI 272A
Advanced Hydrogeology
ECI 144;  MAT 118A recommended.
Flow in confined, unconfined, and leaky aquifers.  Geological aspects of aquifers.  Regional groundwater flow and hydraulics of pumping and recharging wells.  Identification of aquifer parameters.  Isotope hydrogeology and recharge estimation.
ECI 272B
Advanced Hydrogeology
ECI 212A;  ECI 272A.
Processes of subsurface flows and transport. Numerical methods of subsurface fluid flow and transport systems.  Flow in the unsaturated zone.  Fresh water-salt water interface in coastal aquifers.  Macrodispersion. Identification of regional aquifer parameters.  Modeling of aquifer systems.
ECI 272C
Multiphase Reactive Transport
ECI 142;  ECI 144;  ECI 148A.
Multicomponent reactive transport including multiple phases.  Advective/dispersive transport, chemical equilibria, and mass transformation kinetics.  Natural chemical/microbiological processes including sorption, complexation, biodegradation, and diffusive mass transfer.  Eulerian and Lagrangean averaging methods.  Applications to contaminant remediation problems in river and subsurface hydrology.
ECI 273
Water Resources Systems Engineering
ECI 114;  ECI 153;  Or the equivalent.
Planning and management of water resource systems. Deterministic and stochastic simulation and optimization techniques. Capacity design and operation of reservoir systems for water supply, hydropower, flood control, and environmental objectives.
ECI 275
Hydrologic Time-Series Analysis
ECI 114;  ECI 142.
Application of statistical methods for analysis and modeling of hydrologic series.  Statistical simulation and prediction of hydrologic sequences using time series methodology.
ECI 276
Watershed Hydrology
ECI 142;  Or the equivalent.
Analysis and mathematical modeling of hydrologic processes taking place in a watershed. Precipitation analysis and modeling. Theory of overland flow and its kinematic wave approximation.Analysis and modeling of saturated and unsaturated subsurface flow processes taking place on a hill slope.
ECI 277A
Computational River Mechanics I
EAD 115 (can be concurrent);  ECI 141 (can be concurrent).
Unsteady open channel flows, computation of water surface profiles, shallow water equations, St. Venant equations, method of characteristics, finite difference methods, stability and accuracy of explicit and implicit schemes, flood routing in simple and compound channels, advection of plumes.
ECI 277B
Computational River Mechanics II
ECI 277A.
Open channel flows, physical aspects of river mechanics, formulation of depth-averaged equations, boundary conditions, coordinates transformation and grid generation, finite-difference solution techniques, applications to two-dimensional momentum and pollutant transport in rivers.
ECI 277C
Turbulence & Mixing Processes
Graduate standing.
Nature of turbulent flows, conservation equations, momentum, heat and mass transport in free and wall-bounded flows, body forces and mixing, roughness effects, turbulence modeling and simulation.
ECI 278
Hydrodynamics
ECI 141.
Perturbation methods. Basic water waves. Governing equations for fluid motion on a rotating earth. Rotation effects, vorticity dynamics, Ekman layer. Stratification effects, internal waves and turbulent mixing. Combined effects.
ECI 279
Advanced Mechanics of Fluids
ECI 141.
Rotational flows. Navier-Stokes equations and solutions for laminar flow; boundary layer equations and solution techniques. Nature of turbulence. Reynolds equations. Introduction to turbulence modeling.
ECI 280A
Nonlinear Finite Elements for Elastic-Plastic Problems
Consent of Instructor.
State of the art finite element methods and tools for elasticplastic problems, including computational techniques based on the finite element method and the theory of elastoplasticity.
ECI 280B
Nonlinear Dynamic Finite Elements
Consent of Instructor.
State of the art computational methods and tools for analyzing linear and nonlinear dynamics problems.
ECI 281A
Advanced Soil Mechanics
ECI 171.
Consolidation and secondary compression. Preloading and wick drains.  Seepage and seepage pressures. Filtration, drainage, and dewatering. Shear strength: friction, cohesion, dilatancy and critical states.
ECI 281B
Advanced Soil Mechanics
ECI 281A.
Site investigation and soil characterization within the context of slope stability analysis.
ECI 282
Pavement Design & Rehabilitation
ECI 179;  or Consent of Instructor.
Advanced pavement design and structural/functional condition evaluation for concrete and asphalt pavements. Highways, airfields, port facilities; new facilities, rehabilitation, reconstruction. Mechanistic-empirical procedures, materials, climate and traffic characterization. Use of current design methods; recent developments and research.
ECI 283
Physico-Chemical Aspects of Soil Behavior
ECI 171.
Study of the geotechnical behavior of soils considering formation, transport, mineralogy, soil-fluid-electrolyte systems, surface tension, particle mechanics, shape, fabric, and structure.  Laboratories demonstrate effects of fundamental interparticle forces (contact, Van Der Waals, capillarity and chemical). 
ECI 284
Theoretical Geomechanics
ECI 171.
Elasticity, plasticity, micromechanics, coupled behavior and large deformations for geomaterials. Prediction of stress-strain-volume change behavior of geomaterials. Monotonic and cyclic loading, anisotropy, bifurcation of deformation. 
ECI 286
Advanced Foundation Design
ECI 173.
Design and analysis of pile and pier foundations, including seismic effects; deep excavation systems; tie-back, nailing, and anchor systems; coffer dams; loads on buried conduits; ground modification techniques; and other related topics.
ECI 287
Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering
ECI 138;  ECI 281A.
Characteristics and estimation of earthquake ground motions; wave propagation and local site response; liquefaction potential and remediation; residual strength and stability considerations; ground deformations; dynamic soil-structure interaction.
ECI 288
Earth & Rockfill Dams
ECI 281A;  ECI 281B (can be concurrent).
Site selection; design considerations; layout; seismic effects including considerations of fault movements; construction; environmental considerations, instrumentation; maintenance remediation and retrofit of existing dams.
ECI 289A
Selected Topics in Civil Engineering: Environmental Engineering
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study in Environmental Engineering.
ECI 289B
Selected Topics in Civil Engineering: Hydraulics & Hydrologic Engineering
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study in Hydraulics & Hydrologic Engineering.
ECI 289C
Selected Topics in Civil Engineering: Engineering Planning
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study in Engineering Planning.
ECI 289D
Selected Topics in Civil Engineering: Geotechnical Engineering
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study in Geotechnical Engineering.
ECI 289E
Selected Topics in Civil Engineering: Structural Engineering
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study in Structural Engineering.
ECI 289F
Selected Topics in Civil Engineering: Structural Mechanics
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study in Structural Mechanics.
ECI 289G
Selected Topics in Civil Engineering: Transportation Engineering
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study in Transportation Engineering.
ECI 289H
Selected Topics in Civil Engineering: Transportation Planning
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study in Transportation Planning.
ECI 289I
Selected Topics in Civil Engineering: Water Resources Engineering
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study in Water Resources Engineering.
ECI 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

ECI 390
The Teaching of Civil Engineering
Meet qualifications for teaching assistant and/or associate-in in Civil Engineering.
Participation as teaching assistant or associate-in in a designated engineering course. Methods of leading discussion groups or laboratory sections, writing and grading quizzes, use of laboratory equipment, and grading laboratory reports.
ECL 200AN
Principles & Applications of Ecology
STA 102;  MAT 016A;  MAT 016B;  or Consent of Instructor.  First course in Ecology (e.g., ESP 100).Pass One open to graduate majors.
Covers principles of community structure and functioning, species diversity patterns, ecosystem ecology and biogeochemistry, landscape ecology, biogeography and phylogenetics.
ECL 200BN
Principles & Applications of Ecology
STA 102;  MAT 016A;  MAT 016B;  or Consent of Instructor.  First course in Ecology (e.g., ESP 100).Pass One open to graduate majors.
Provides a broad background in the principles and applications of ecology, and serves as a foundation for advanced ecology courses. Topics include ecophysiology, behavioral ecology, population ecology, genetics and evolution. Emphasis on historical developments, current understanding, and real world applications.
ECL 203
Physiological Ecology
EVE 101 or EST 100; NPB 110 or PLB 111 or EST 129; elementary calculus.
Comparative examination of several animal groups addressing fundamental physiological mechanisms that shape the ecology of each animal group.
ECL 203
Physiological Ecology
EVE 101 or EST 100; NPB 110 or PLB 111 or EST 129; elementary calculus.
Comparative examination of several animal groups addressing fundamental physiological mechanisms that shape the ecology of each animal group.
ECL 205
Community Ecology
An upper division course in Ecology (ECL).
Introduction to literature and contemporary research into processes structuring ecological communities.
ECL 206
Concepts & Methods in Plant Community Ecology
Consent of Instructor.  Introductory courses in statistics and plant ecology.
Principles and techniques of vegetation analysis, including structure, composition, and dynamics. Emphasis given to sampling procedures, association analysis, ordination, processes and mechanisms of succession, and classification. Most techniques are demonstrated or conducted during field trips and laboratories.
ECL 207
Plant Population Biology
Advanced undergraduate ecology course (e.g., ESP 100, EVE 101, ENT 104 or PLB 117), and advanced undergraduate course in genetics and/or evolution (e.g., BIS 101 or EVE 100).
Introduction to theoretical and empirical research in plant population biology. Emphasis placed on linking ecological ecological and genetic approaches to plant population biology.
ECL 208
Issues in Conservation Biology
Introductory biology (e.g. BIS 002B) and an upper division organismal biology class.
Graduate-level introduction to current research in conservation biology. Emphasizes reading and discussing primary literature. Specific topics will reflect the research interests of UC Davis conservation biology faculty.
ECL 210N
Environmental Policy & Human Ecology
Graduate standing in Anthropology, Ecology, Political Science, Sociology Graduate Groups, or consent of instructor.
Principles drawn from social science, ecology and evolution to study of human populations and behavior, emphasizing environmental/resource issues. These principles form a synthetic framework that articulates elements drawn from the social sciences as well as biology.
ECL 210N
Environmental Policy & Human Ecology
Graduate standing in Anthropology, Ecology, Political Science, Sociology Graduate Groups, or consent of instructor.
Principles drawn from social science, ecology and evolution to study of human populations and behavior, emphasizing environmental/resource issues. These principles form a synthetic framework that articulates elements drawn from the social sciences as well as biology.
ECL 212A
Environmental Policy Process
Course in public policy (e.g., ESP 160); environmental law (e.g., ESP 161); course in statistics (e.g., SOC 106 or ARE 106).
Introduction to selected topics of the policy process and applications to the field of environmental policy. Develops critical reading skills, understanding of policy theory, and an ability to apply multiple theories to the same phenomena.
ECL 212B
Environmental Policy Evaluation
(STA 108 or ARE 106);  ARE 176;  Intermediate microeconomics (e.g., ECN 100); policy analysis (e.g., ESP 168A or the equivalent).
Method and practice, philosophical basis, and political role of policy analysis. Reviews basic concepts from economic theory; how and why environmental problems emerge in a market economy; and tools necessary for solving environmental problems. 
ECL 214
Marine Ecology: Concepts & Practice
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing or one course in ecology, one course in evolution or genetics; survey course in marine ecology recommended.
Critical review and analysis of concepts and practices in modern marine ecology at the interface of several fields of study including oceanography, evolution, behavior, and physiology. Emphasis on critical thinking, problem solving, and hands-on study. Two field trips required. 
ECL 215
Social Ecological Systems
Completion of core courses for specific graduate programs, for example ECL 200A, ECL 200B.
Overview of social-ecological systems that links environmental policy and decision-making to ecological processes. Delves deeper into different social science topics related to this broader idea. Applying of course readings to case studies chosen by students and a final paper. 
ECL 216
Ecology & Agriculture
EVE 011;  or Consent of Instructor.
Ecological principles as relevant to agriculture. Integration of ecological approaches into agricultural research to increase ecosystem functions and services. Topics include crop autoecology, biotic interactions among crops and pests, ecosystem and landscape ecology.
ECL 219
Ecosystem Biogeochemistry
Introductory courses in ecology/biology and soils are recommended; undergraduates accepted with consent of instructor.
Multi-disciplinary analysis of energy and nutrient transfers within terrestrial ecosystems. Examination of processes and inter- and intra-system interactions between the atmosphere, biosphere, lithosphere, and hydrosphere. Laboratory section uses biogeochemical simulation models to examine case studies.
ECL 225
Terrestrial Field Ecology
Introductory ecology and introductory statistics or consent of instructor.
Field course conducted over spring break and four weekends at Bodega Bay, emphasizing student projects. Ecological hypothesis testing, data gathering, analysis, and written and oral presentation of results are stressed.
ECL 231
Mathematical Methods in Population Biology 
MAT 016C or MAT 021C;  Or the equivalent.
Mathematical methods used in population biology. Linear and nonlinear difference equation and differential equation models are studied, using stability analysis and qualitative methods. Partial differential equation models are introduced. Applications to population biology models are stressed.
ECL 233
Computational Methods in Population Biology
A course in theoretical ecology (e.g., ECL 231 or an equivalent to ESP 121 from your undergraduate institution) or consent of instructor; no programming experience required.
Numerical methods for simulating population dynamics using the computational software package R. Emphasis placed on model formulation and development, theoretical concepts and philosophical principles to guide simulation efforts, model parameterization, and implementing simulations with R.
ECL 242
Ecological Genetics: Applied Genetics for Ecology, Health, & Conservation of Natural Populations
Undergraduate genetics and ecology/conservation biology courses recommended.Restricted to graduate students, 2nd or 3rd year veterinary students; advanced undergraduate students with consent of instructor.
Introduction to the field of applied ecological genetics to include applications in conservation ecology, population genetics, population biology, wildlife health and disease ecology.
ECL 243
Ecological Genomics
ECL 242;  Or equivalent training in ecology and genetics according to the discretion of the instructors.
Genomics concepts, technologies, and analyses for ecology research. Mixture of lecture, discussion of recent literature, hands-on training in data analysis and experimental design, and research proposal preparation and evaluation. One all-day field trip is required.
ECL 262
Advanced Population Dynamics
Graduate standing; advanced course in ecology (e.g., EVE 101), population dynamics (e.g., WFC 122), and one year of calculus; familiarity with matrix algebra and partial differential equations recommended.
Logical basis for population models, evaluation of simple ecological models, current population models with age, size, and stage structure, theoretical basis for management and exemplary case histories. Emphasis on development and use of realistic population models in ecological research.
ECL 271
Research Conference in Ecology 
Consent of Instructor.
Critical presentation and evaluation of current literature and ongoing research in ecology. Requirements include active participation in weekly discussions and the presentation of a paper or chapter once per quarter.
ECL 280
Current Anthropology Journal Editorial Workshop
Consent of Instructor.Students must enroll for all three quarters.
Reading and offering workshop critiques of manuscripts submitted for publication, and reading and discussion of other relevant work in anthropology and human ecology. Track and edit published comments and authors replies that accompany major features. Participation in the development of new sections for the electronic edition of the journal, including a "news and views" section and a debate section. 
ECL 290
Seminar in Ecology 
Consent of Instructor.
Topics in ecology. Students are expected to present an oral seminar on a particular aspect of the general topic under consideration.
ECL 296
Topics in Ecology & Evolution 
Graduate standing.
Seminars presented by visiting lecturers, UC Davis faculty, and graduate students.
ECL 297T
Tutoring in Ecology
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing in ecology.
Teaching ecology including conducting discussion groups for regular departmental courses under direct guidance of staff.
ECL 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

ECN 090X
Lower Division Seminar
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.Limited enrollment.
Examination of a special topic in Economics through shared readings,discussions, and written assignments.
ECN 092
Internship & Field Work
Consent of Instructor.
Intensive study of practical application of concepts in economics, stressing research methods and empirical analysis.
ECN 098
Group Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.
Primarily for lower division students.
ECN 099
Individual Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

ECN 100
Intermediate Micro Theory
(ECN 001A C- or better or ECN 001AV C- or better);  ECN 001B C- or better;  ((MAT 016A C- or better,  MAT 016B C- or better) or (MAT 021A C- or better,  MAT 021B C- or better) or (MAT 017A C- or better,  MAT 017B C- or better)).
Price and distribution theory under conditions of perfect and imperfect competition. General equilibrium and welfare economics.
ECN 100
Intermediate Micro Theory
(ECN 001A C- or better or ECN 001AV C- or better);  ECN 001B C- or better;  ((MAT 016A C- or better,  MAT 016B C- or better) or (MAT 021A C- or better,  MAT 021B C- or better) or (MAT 017A C- or better,  MAT 017B C- or better)).
Price and distribution theory under conditions of perfect and imperfect competition. General equilibrium and welfare economics.
ECN 100A
Intermediate Micro Theory: Consumer & Producer Theory
(ECN 001A C- or better or ECN 001AV C- or better);  ECN 001B C- or better;  (MAT 016A C- or better or MAT 017A C- or better or MAT 021A C- or better);  (MAT 016B C- or better or MAT 017B C- or better or MAT 021B C- or better).
Consumer and producer theory. Equilibrium and welfare analysis. Topics include competitive markets, consumer and producer surplus at an intermediate level.
ECN 100B
Intermediate Micro Theory: Imperfect Competition & Market Failure
ECN 100A.
Imperfect competition and market failure. Topics include exchange, monopoly, game theory, uncertainty, asymmetric information, and public goods.
ECN 101
Intermediate Macro Theory
(ECN 001A C- or better or ECN 001AV C- or better);  ECN 001B C- or better;  ((MAT 016A C- or better,  MAT 016B C- or better) or (MAT 021A C- or better,  MAT 021B C- or better) or (MAT 017A C- or better,  MAT 017B C- or better)).
Theory of income, employment and prices under static and dynamic conditions, and long term growth.
ECN 102
Analysis of Economic Data
(ECN 001A or ECN 001AV);  ECN 001B;  (STA 013 or STA 013Y or STA 032);  (MAT 016A or MAT 017A or MAT 021A);  (MAT 016B or MAT 017B or MAT 021B);  or Consent of Instructor.
Analysis of economic data to investigate key relationships emphasized in introductory micro and macro economics. Obtaining, transforming, displaying data; statistical analysis of economic data; basic univariate and multivariate regression analysis.
ECN 103
Economics of Uncertainty & Information
(ECN 100 or ECN 100A or (ARE 100A,  ARE 100B)),  ECN 100B,  (MAT 016A or MAT 017A or MAT 021A),  (MAT 016B or MAT 017B or MAT 021B).
Optimal decisions under uncertainty, expected utility theory, economics of insurance, asymmetric information, signalling in the job market, incentives and Principal-Agent theory, optimal search strategies and the reservation price principle.
ECN 106
Decision Making
((MAT 016A C- or better,  MAT 016B C- or better) or (MAT 017A C- or better,  MAT 017B C- or better) or (MAT 021A C- or better,  MAT 021B C- or better));  (STA 013 C- or better or STA 013Y C- or better or STA 032 C- or better);  or Consent of Instructor.
Descriptive and normative analysis of individual decision making, with applications to personal, professional, financial, and public policy decisions. Emphasis on decision making under uncertainty and over time. Heuristics and biases in the psychology of decisions; overcoming decision traps. 
ECN 107
Neuroeconomics/Reinforcement Learning & Decision Making 
(PSC 100 or PSC 100Y or PSC 135 or ARE 100A or ECN 100A or NPB 162 or NPB 163);  (STA 013 or STA 013Y or STA 100 or PSC 103A);  or Consent of Instructor.
Theoretical and empirical approaches to neuroeconomics (neuroscience of decision making) from psychology, neuroscience, economics, and computer science. Neuroscience of judgment and decision making, behavioral economics, and reinforcement learning.
ECN 110A
World Economic History Before the Industrial Revolution
(ECN 001A or ECN 001AV);  ECN 001B.
Development and application of analytical models to explain the nature and functioning of economies before the Industrial Revolution. Examples will be drawn from a variety of societies, including England, China, Polynesia, and Pre-Columbian America.
ECN 110B
World Economic History Since the Industrial Revolution
(ECN 001A or ECN 001AV);  ECN 001B.
Development and application of analytical models to explain the nature and functioning of economies since the Industrial Revolution.  Examples will be drawn from a variety of societies, including England, China, Germany, and India.
ECN 111A
Economic History
(ECN 001A or ECN 001AV);  ECN 001B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Survey of economic change in the United States from Colonial times to 1865; reference to other regions in the Western Hemisphere.
ECN 111B
Economics History
(ECN 001A or ECN 001AV) or ECN 001B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Survey of economic change in the United States from 1865 to the post World War II era.
ECN 115A
Economic Development
(ECN 001A or ECN 001AV);  ECN 001B.
Major issues encountered in emerging from international poverty, including problems of growth and structural change, human welfare,population growth and health, labor markets and internal migration. Important issues of policy concerning international trade and industrialization.
ECN 115B
Economic Development
(ECN 001A or ECN 001AV);  ECN 001B.
Major macroeconomic issues of developing countries. Issues include problems in generating capital, conduct of monetary and fiscalpolicies, foreign aid and investment. Important issues of policy concerning international borrowing and external debt of developing countries.
ECN 115BY
Economic Development
ECN 001A;  ECN 001B.
Major macroeconomic issues of developing countries. Issues include problems in generating capital, conduct of monetary and fiscalpolicies, foreign aid and investment. Important issues of policy concerning international borrowing and external debt of developing countries.
ECN 116
Comparative Economic Systems
(ECN 100 or ECN 100A or ARE 100A);  (ECN 100B or ARE 100B).
Economics analysis of the relative virtues of capitalism and socialism, including welfare economics.  Marxian exploitation theory, the socialist  calculation debate (Hayek and Lange), alternative capitalist systems (Japan, Germany, U.S.) and contemporary models of market socialism.
ECN 117
Economics of International Immigration
(ECN 001A or ECN 001AV);  ECN 001B.Pass One open to Economics majors only.
Introduction to research on the economics of immigration. Immigrant demographics and reasons for migrating. Immigrant success and effects on native populations. Influence of immigrants on those left behind. Discussion of migration policy in the US and other countries.
ECN 121A
Industrial Organization
(ECN 100 or ECN 100A or ARE 100A);  (ECN 100B or ARE 100B).
Appraisal of the role of competition and monopoly in the American economy; market structure, conduct, and economic performance of a variety of industries.
ECN 121B
Industrial Organization
(ECN 100 or ECN 100A or ARE 100A);  (ECN 100B or ARE 100B).
Study of antitrust and economic regulation. Emphasis on applying theoretical models to U.S. industries and case studies, including telecommunications, software, and electricity markets. Topics include natural monopoly, optimal and actual regulatory mechanisms, deregulation, mergers, predatory pricing, and monopolization.
ECN 122
Theory of Games & Strategic Behavior
(MAT 016A,  MAT 016B) or (MAT 021A,  MAT 021B) or (MAT 017A,  MAT 017B);  or Consent of Instructor.
Introduction to game theory. Explanation of the behavior of rational individuals with interacting and often conflicting interests. Non-cooperative and cooperative theory. Applications to economics, political science and other fields.
ECN 125
Energy Economics
ECN 100 or ECN 100A or ARE 100A.Pass One open to Economics and Graduate School of Management majors.
Application of theoretical and empirical models to examine efficiency in energy production and use. Energy and environmental policy, market structure and power, global climate change, optimal regulation, and real-world applications; e.g., California electricity crisis. 
ECN 125
Energy Economics
ECN 100 or ECN 100A or ARE 100A;  Consent of Instructor.Pass One open to Economics Majors, Energy Systems, Transportation Technology & Policy, and Civil & Environmental Engineering Graduate students and Graduate School of Management. 
Application of theoretical and empirical models to examine efficiency in energy production and use. Energy and environmental policy, market structure and power, global climate change, optimal regulation, and real-world applications; e.g., California electricity crisis. 
ECN 130
Public Microeconomics
(ECN 100 or ECN 100A or ARE 100A);  (ECN 100B or ARE 100B).
Public expenditures; theory and applications. Efficiency and equity of competitive markets; externalities, public goods, and market failures; positive and normative aspects of public policy for expenditure, including benefit-cost analysis. Topics include consumer protection, pollution, education, poverty and crime.
ECN 131
Public Finance
(ECN 100 or ECN 100A or ARE 100A);  (ECN 100B or ARE 100B).
Economic burden of taxation; equity and efficiency considerations in tax design; structure and economic effects of the U.S. tax system (including personal income tax, corporation income tax, and property tax); tax loopholes; recent developments; tax reform proposals.
ECN 132
Health Economics
(ECN 100 or ECN 100A or ARE 100A);  (ECN 102 or ECN 140 or ARE 106 or STA 108);  ECN 100B;  or Consent of Instructor.
The health care market, emphasizing the role and use of economics. Individual demand, provision of services by doctors and hospitals, health insurance, managed care and competition, the role of government access to health care.
ECN 133Y
Poverty, Inequality & Public Policy
(ECN 001A or ECN 001AV);  ECN 001B.Limited to 99; 3 sections of 33 each.
Examination of the economics of poverty and inequality in the United States, including measurement, trends, and related policies.
ECN 134
Financial Economics
(ECN 100 or ECN 100A or ARE 100A);  (STA 013 or STA 013Y);  ECN 100B.
General background and rationale of corporation; finance as resource allocation over time; decision making under uncertainty and the role of information; capital market and interest rate structure; financial decisions.  
ECN 134
Financial Economics
(ECN 100 or ECN 100A or ARE 100A);  (STA 013 or STA 013Y);  (ECN 100B,  ARE 100B).
General background and rationale of corporation; finance as resource allocation over time; decision making under uncertainty and the role of information; capital market and interest rate structure; financial decisions.  
ECN 134
Financial Economics
(ECN 100 or ECN 100A or ARE 100A);  (STA 013 or STA 013Y);  (ECN 100B or ARE 100B).
General background and rationale of corporation; finance as resource allocation over time; decision making under uncertainty and the role of information; capital market and interest rate structure; financial decisions.  
ECN 135
Money, Banks, & Financial Institutions
ECN 101;  (STA 013 or STA 013Y).
Banks and the banking system. Uncertainty and asymmetric information in the lending process; efficiency of competitive equilibrium in lending markets. Regulation and the conduct of monetary policy.
ECN 136
Topics in Macroeconomic Theory
ECN 101.
Advanced Topics in macroeconomics theory. Develops the theoretical and empirical analysis of a specific field of macroeconomics. Possible topics include, business cycle theories, growth theory, monetary economics, political economics and theories of unemployment and inflation.
ECN 137
Macroeconomic Policy
(ECN 100 or ECN 100A or ARE 100A);  (ECN 100B or ARE 100B);  ECN 101;  (STA 013 or STA 013Y).
Theory and practice of macroeconomic policy, both monetary and fiscal.
ECN 140
Econometrics
(ECN 100 or ECN 100A or ARE 100A);  (ECN 100B or ARE 100B);  ECN 101;  ECN 102;  (STA 013 or STA 013Y).Pass One open to Economics Majors.
Problems of observation, estimation and hypotheses testing in economics through the study of the theory and application of linear regression models. Critical evaluation of selected examples of empirical research and exercises in applied economics.
ECN 140
Econometrics
(ECN 100 or ECN 100A or ARE 100A);  (ECN 102 or STA 108);  or Consent of Instructor.Pass One open to Economics Majors.
Problems of observation, estimation and hypotheses testing in economics through the study of the theory and application of linear regression models. Critical evaluation of selected examples of empirical research and exercises in applied economics.
ECN 145
Transportation Economics
(ECN 100 or (ARE 100A,  ARE 100B)),  ((MAT 016A,  MAT 016B) or (MAT 017A,  MAT 017B)),  (STA 013 or STA 013Y),  ECN 102,  ECN 140,  (ARE 106 or STA 108);  or Consent of Instructor.Intended for advanced Economics undergraduates. 
Examination of fundamental problems of planning and financing transportation "infrastructure" (roads, ports, airports). The economics of the automobile industry, as well as the impact of government regulation and deregulation in the airlines and trucking industries.
ECN 145
Transportation Economics
(ECN 100 or ECN 100A or ARE 100A);  (ECN 102,  STA 108);  or Consent of Instructor.
Examination of fundamental problems of planning and financing transportation "infrastructure" (roads, ports, airports). The economics of the automobile industry, as well as the impact of government regulation and deregulation in the airlines and trucking industries. Intended for advanced Economics undergraduates. 
ECN 151A
Economics of the Labor Market
ECN 100 or ECN 100A or ARE 100A.
Theory of labor supply and demand; determination of wages and employment in the labor market. Policy issues:  labor force participation by married women; minimum wages and youth unemployment; effect of unions on wages.
ECN 151B
Economics of Human Resources
ECN 100 or ECN 100A or ARE 100A.
Human resource analysis; introduction to human capital theory and economics of education; the basic theory of wage differentials, including theories of labor market discrimination; income distribution; poverty. Policy issues; negative income tax; manpower training programs; incomes policy.
ECN 152
Economics of Education
(ECN 100 C- or better or ECN 100A or ARE 100A C- or better);  (ECN 100B or ARE 100B C- or better);  ECN 102 C- or better;  (STA 013 C- or better or STA 013Y C- or better or STA 032 C- or better);  or Consent of Instructor.
Application of theoretical and empirical tools of economics to the education sector. Demand for Education; Education Production and Market Structures in Education. Policy applications: class size reduction, school finance equalization, accountability, and school choice.
ECN 160A
International Microeconomics
ECN 100 or ECN 100A or ARE 100A.
International grade theory: impact of trade on the domestic and world economies; public policy toward external trade.
ECN 160B
International Macroeconomics
ECN 101.
Macroeconomic theory of an open economy. Balance of payments adjustment mechanism, international monetary economics issues; international financial institutions and their policies.
ECN 162
International Economic Relations
(ECN 001A or ECN 001AV);  ECN 001B;  or Consent of Instructor.
International trade & monetary relations, trade policy, exchange rate policy, policies toward international capital migration and investment. Emphasis on current policy issues. Intended especially for non-majors. 
ECN 167
Economic Development in Weak States
ECN 100A;  ECN 100B.Pass One open to Economics majors only.
Barriers to economic development in developing countries. Economic and policy tools to address barriers within a functioning, well-intentioned government and non-functioning or ill-intentioned governments. Conflict between the state and other subnational actors for legitimate political control. Field experiments and other methodology to understand the success of economic and policy tools in weak states
ECN 171
Economy of East Asia
(ECN 001A or ECN 001AV);  ECN 001B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Intensive reading, discussion and research on selected topics from the economies of the countries of East Asia. Consult department for course scheduling.
ECN 190
Topics in Economics
Consent of Instructor.
Selected topics in economic analysis and public policy.  Variable content. 
ECN 190X
Upper Division Seminar
(ECN 100 or ECN 100A);  ECN 100B;  ECN 101;  and Consent of Instructor.Limited enrollment.
In-depth examination at an upper division level of a special topic in Economics. Emphasis on focused analytical work. May not be repeated for credit.
ECN 192
Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Internship experience off and on campus in all subject areas offered in the Department of Economics. Supervised by a member of the staff.
ECN 194HA
Special Study for Honors Students
Major in Economics with senior standing; consent of instructor and completion of 135 units with a minimum GPA of 3.500 in courses counted toward the major.
A program of research culminating in the writing of a senior honors thesis under the direction of a faculty advisor.
ECN 194HB
Special Study for Honors Students
Major in Economics with senior standing; consent of instructor and completion of 135 units with a minimum GPA of 3.500 in courses counted toward the major.
A program of research culminating in the writing of a senior honors thesis under the direction of a faculty advisor.
ECN 197T
Tutoring in Economics
Consent of instructor and chairperson.
Undergraduates assist the instructor by tutoring students in one of the department's regularly scheduled courses.  
ECN 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

ECN 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

ECN 200A
Microeconomic Theory
Graduate standing.
Linear and non-linear optimization theory applied to develop the theory of the profit-maximizing firm and the utility-maximizing consumer.
ECN 200B
Microeconomic Theory
ECN 200A.
Characteristics of market equilibrium under perfect competition, simple monopoly and monopsony. Emphasis on general equilibrium and welfare economics; the sources of market success and market failure.
ECN 200C
Microeconomic Theory
ECN 200B.
Uncertainty and information economics. Individual decision making under uncertainty. Introduction to game theory, with emphasis on applications to markets with firms that are imperfect competitors or consumers that are imperfectly informed.
ECN 200D
Macroeconomic Theory
ECN 101;  MAT 021A;  MAT 021B;  MAT 021C;  or equivalent courses.
Macro static theory of income, employment, and prices.
ECN 200E
Macroeconomic Theory
ECN 200B (can be concurrent);  ECN 200D.
Macrodynamic theory of income, employment, and prices.
ECN 203A
Advanced Economic Theory
ECN 200A;  ECN 200B.
Advanced topics in general equilibrium theory and welfare economics: existence, determinateness and efficiency; intertemporal economies; uncertainty.
ECN 203B
Advanced Economic Theory: Game Theory
ECN 200A;  ECN 200B;  ECN 200C.
Covers the most recent developments in game theory, with the focus changing from year to year. Main topics are: refinements Nash equilibrium, repeated games, evolution, social situations, bounded rationality, and bargaining theory.
ECN 203C
Topics in Economic Theory
ECN 200A;  ECN 200B;  ECN 200C.
Selected topics in contemporary microeconomic theory.
ECN 210C
Economic History
A graduate course in economic history.
Selected topics and issues, emphasis on current research. (Quarter offered to be flexible.)
ECN 214
Development Economics
ARE 100A;  ARE 100B;  ECN 101;  ARE 204/ECN 204 and ECN 160A-ECN 160B recommended.
Review of the principal theoretical and empirical issues whose analysis has formed development economics. Analysis of economic development theories and development strategies and their application to specificpolicy issues in developing country contexts.
ECN 215A
Microdevelopment Theory & Methods I
ECN 200A or ECN 204;  ECN 240A recommended.
Agricultural development theory, with a focus on microeconomics. Agricultural household behavior with and without market imperfections and uncertainty. Analysis of rural land, labor, credit and insurance markets, institutions, and contracts.
ECN 215B
Open Macroeconomics of Development
(ARE 200A or ECN 200A);  (ARE 204 or ECN 204);  (ECN 214 or ECN 215A);  ECN 200D or ECN 205.
Models and policy approaches regarding trade, monetary and fiscal issues, capital flows and debt are discussed in the macroeconomic framework of an open developing country. Basic analytical focus is real exchange rate and its impact on sectoral allocation of resources.
ECN 215C
Microdevelopment Theory & Methods II
ECN 215A.
Extension of development theory and microeconomic methods. Agricultural growth and technological change; poverty and income inequality; multisectoral, including village and regional models. Computable general equilibrium methods and applications.
ECN 215D
Environmental & Economic Development
ECN 200A;  (ECN 204 or ARE 275).
Interdisciplinary course drawing on theoretical and empirical research on interactions between environmental resource use and economic development processes. Analysis of issues emerging at the interface of environmental and development economics.
ECN 216
Energy & Climate Policy
ECN 100A or ARE 100A;  or Consent of Instructor.Pass One restricted to graduate students in the following programs: Economics, Energy Graduate Group, and Transportation Technology and Policy Graduate Group.
Fundamentals of energy technology, economics, and policy. Survey and analysis of current and prospective climate policies at the local and global level, including but not limited to cap-and-trade, emissions offsets, intensity standards, technology standards, mandates and subsidies.
ECN 221A
The Theory of Industrial Organization
ECN 200A;  ECN 200B;  ECN 200C.
Game theory is used to analyze strategic interaction of firms in industries. Topics include models of competition, product differentiation, entry-deterring strategies, contractual arrangements, vertical control and antitrust issues.
ECN 221B
Empirical Analysis in Industrial Organization
ECN 221A;  ECN 240B.
Recent empirical work in industrial organization.  Topics include empirical analysis of cartels, product differentiation, innovation and technological change, and imperfect competition in international markets.
ECN 221C
Industrial Organization & Regulation
ECN 221A;  ECN 240B.
Optimal regulation of natural monopoly. Topics include regulatory mechanisms for single and multiple output firms under symmetric and asymmetric information, optimality without regulation, the economic theory of regulation, and empirical studies of regulation and deregulation.
ECN 230A
Public Economics
ECN 200C.
Measures of deadweight loss and consumer surplus; optimal commodity and income taxation; tax incidence; policy issues in personal taxation, corporate taxation, and social insurance; the evaluation of effective tax rates.
ECN 230B
Public Economics
ECN 240A;  ECN 240B.
Effects of government policies on economic behavior; labor supply, program participation, investment, consumption and savings.
ECN 230C
Public Economics
ECN 200C;  ECN 240B.
Advanced topics in economics of the public sector, with emphasis on current research. Topics differ from year to year.
ECN 235A
Macroeconomics
ECN 200D;  or Consent of Instructor.
Frontiers of applied/empirical macroeconomics. Evidence and lessons from macroeconomic history for The Great Depression, financial crises, efficient markets, parity conditions, capital flows, default, financial crises, exchange rates, growth, and other current empirical research topics.
ECN 235B
Macroeconomics
ECN 200D;  or Consent of Instructor.
Search theory, theory of real-world markets characterized by search frictions, with applications: Labor economics: models of unemployment and wages differentials; Financial economics: determination of asset prices in OTC financial markets; Monetary Economics: foundations for money as a medium of exchange.
ECN 235C
Macroeconomics
ECN 200D;  or Consent of Instructor.
Basic numerical methods for analytically intractable problems in economics. Techniques presented applicable in a wide range of fields including macroeconomics, econometrics, resource economics, labor economics, economic theory, international trade, finance, game theory, public finance, contract theory, and others.
ECN 239
Econometric Foundations
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Prepares students for econometric theory and empirical work by examining the statistical foundation of econometrics. Special attention is paid to problems specific to non-experimental data common to social sciences. Topics from matrix algebra are also covered.
ECN 240A
Econometric Methods
ECN 239;  or Consent of Instructor.
Least squares, instrumental variables, and maximum likelihood estimation and inference for single equation linear regression model; linear restrictions; heteroskedasticity; autocorrelation; lagged dependent variables.
ECN 240B
Econometric Methods
ECN 240A.
Topics include asymptotic theory and instrumental variables, pooled time-series cross-section estimation, seemingly unrelated regression, classical hypothesis tests, identification and estimation of simultaneous equation models, cointegration, errorcorrection models, and qualitative and limited dependent variable models.
ECN 240C
Time Series Econometrics
ECN 240B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Probability theory; estimation, inference and forecasting of time series models; trends and non-standard asymptotic theory; vector time series methods and cointegration; time series models for higher order moments and transition data; state-space modeling and the Kalman filter. 
ECN 240D
Cross Section Econometrics
ECN 240B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Estimation and inference for nonlinear regression models for cross-section data; models for discrete data and for limited dependent variables; models for panel data; additional topics such as bootstrap and semiparametric regression.
ECN 240E
Topics in Time Series Econometrics
ECN 240C;  or Consent of Instructor.
Modern econometric techniques for time series data. Expand on topics covered in ECN 240A, ECN 240B, ECN 240C. Content may differ year to year.
ECN 240F
Topics in Cross Section Econometrics
ECN 240D;  or Consent of Instructor.
Modern econometrics techniques for cross-section data. Expand on topics covered in ECN 240A, ECN 240B, ECN 240D. Content may differ year to year.
ECN 250A
Labor Economics
(ECN 150A and ECN 150B) or the equivalent.
Philosophy, theory and history of American and foreign labor movements; union structure, organization and collective bargaining under changing labor market conditions; current labor market issues.
ECN 250B
Labor Economics
ECN 151A;  or Consent of Instructor.  ECN 204 or ECN 200A recommended.
Microeconomic theory of labor supply and labor demand, estimation of labor supply and demand functions; human capital theory; labor market analysis.
ECN 260A
International Economics
ECN 200A or ECN 204.
Theory of trade determinants; gains from trade; tariffs and effective protection; economic unions.
ECN 260B
International Economics
ECN 200D;  ECN 200E.
Balance of payments adjustment mechanisms; foreign exchange marketstheories of balance of payments policy and international monetary mechanisms.
ECN 260CN
International Investment & Trade
ECN 260A.
Analysis of foreign investment and its links to trade; theories of the firm as they relate to firm's export and investment decisions; and an introduction to the political economy of trade policies.
ECN 260D
Topics in International Macroeconomics
ECN 260B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Survey of current literature in international macroeconomic theory.
ECN 260E
Topics in International Trade
ECN 260A;  ECN 260B.
Current literature in international trade theory.
ECN 260F
International Macroeconomic Policy
ECN 260B.
Theory and practice of international macroeconomic policy. Topics include exchange rate regimes, international financial institutions, crises and current topics.
ECN 270A
Economics of Growth
ECN 200D;  ECN 200E.
Modern theories and empirics of economic growth beginning with the neoclassical theories up to current endogenous growth models. Emphasis on the analysis of human capital and growth, technological innovation, its diffusion and  empirical evidence on growth.
ECN 270B
Economics of Growth
ECN 200D;  ECN 200E.
Empirical analysis of growth patterns and growth models. Emphasis on the relationship between macroeconomic management and long-term growth; the use of foreign capital in accelerating growth and its occasional mishaps; the comparison of growth performance in East Asia and Latin America since WW2; the experiences of centrally-planned economies and transitions to market-based growth; and the transformation from an industrial economy to a knowledge economy. 
ECN 270C
Economics of Growth
ECN 200D;  ECN 200E.
Institutional bases; politics; contracts and commitment; money and finance; malthusian dynamics; modern economic growth; transition of industrialization; dual economies, core and periphery; sources of convergence and divergence; openness and growth; resources, demography, and geography; institutions, imperialism, and class conflicts.
ECN 290
Topics in Economics
Consent of Instructor.
Selected topics in economic analysis and public policy, focusing on current research.
ECN 291
Contemporary Economics Seminar
Graduate standing in Economics.
Seminar series on topics of current interest.  
ECN 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

ECN 299
Individual Study
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

ECN 397
Teaching of Economics
Graduate standing in economics.
Teaching of economics: methods of instruction, organization of courses, examination and evaluation procedures.
ECS 020
Discrete Mathematics For Computer Science
MAT 016A C- or better or MAT 017A C- or better or MAT 021A C- or better.Pass One open to Computer Science, Computer Science Engineering, Computer Engineering, and Cognitive Science Majors only.           
Discrete mathematics of particular utility to computer science. Proofs by induction. Propositional and first-order logic. Sets, functions, and relations. Big-O and related notations. Recursion and solutions of recurrence relations. Combinatorics. Probability on finite probability spaces. Graph theory.
ECS 032B
Introduction to Data Structures
ECS 010 C- or better or ECS 030 C- or better or ECS 032A C- or better or ECS 036A C- or better.
Design and analysis of data structures using Python; trees, heaps, searching, sorting, and graphs. 
ECS 034
Software Development in UNIX & C/C++
ECS 032B C- or better;  or Consent of Instructor.
UNIX Operating system tools and programming environment. Methods for debugging and verification. Principles of C and object-oriented programming in C++. Extensive programming.  
ECS 036A
Programming and Problem Solving 
Prior experience with basic programming concepts (variable, loops, conditional statements) required; must satisfy computer science placement exam, or C- or better in ECS 32A or ECS 10.Pass One restricted to Computer Science, Computer Science and Engineering, Computer Engineering, Electrical Engineering, and Cognitive Science majors only. 
Computers and computer programming for students with some prior experience, algorithm design, and debugging. Good programming style. Use of basic UNIX tools. 
ECS 036A
Programming & Problem Solving 
ECS 032A C- or better or ECS 010 C- or better;  or must satisfy computer science placement exam; prior experience with basic programming concepts (variable, loops, conditional statements) required.Pass One restricted to Computer Science, Computer Science & Engineering, Computer Engineering, Electrical Engineering, and Cognitive Science majors only. 
Computers and computer programming for students with some prior experience, algorithm design, and debugging. Good programming style. Use of basic UNIX tools. 
ECS 036A
Programming & Problem Solving 
ECS 032A C- or better or ECS 010 C- or better;  or must satisfy computer science placement exam; prior experience with basic programming concepts (variable, loops, conditional statements) required.Pass One restricted to Computer Science, Computer Science & Engineering, Computer Engineering, Electrical Engineering, and Cognitive Science majors only; Pass Two open to undergraduate students only.
Computers and computer programming for students with some prior experience, algorithm design, and debugging. Good programming style. Use of basic UNIX tools. 
ECS 036B
Software Development & Object-Oriented Programming in C++     
ECS 030 C- or better or ECS 036A C- or better.Pass One restricted to Computer Science, Computer Science and Engineering, Computer Engineering, Electrical Engineering, and Cognitive Science majors only.  
Object-oriented programming in C++. Basic data structures and their use. Writing good programs of increased complexity and efficiency. Methods for debugging and verification.  
ECS 036C
Data Structures, Algorithms, & Programming 
(ECS 040 C- or better or ECS 036B C- or better);  ECS 020 C- or better.Pass One restricted to Computer Science, Computer Science and Engineering, Computer Engineering, Electrical Engineering, and Cognitive Science majors only.  
Design and analysis of data structures for a variety of applications; trees, heaps, searching, sorting, hashing, and graphs. Extensive programming. 
ECS 050
Computer Organization & Machine-Dependent Programming
ECS 040 C- or better or ECS 032B C- or better or ECS 036B C- or better.Pass One open to Computer Science, Computer Science Engineering, Computer Engineering, and Cognitive Science Majors only.
Comparative study of different hardware architectures via programming in the assembly languages of various machines. Role of system software in producing an abstract machine. Introduction to I/O devices and programming.
ECS 050
Computer Organization & Machine-Dependent Programming
ECS 040 C- or better or ECS 034 C- or better or ECS 036B C- or better.Pass One open to Computer Science, Computer Science & Engineering, Computer Engineering, and Cognitive Science Majors only.
Comparative study of different hardware architectures via programming in the assembly languages of various machines. Role of system software in producing an abstract machine. Introduction to I/O devices and programming.
ECS 089A
Special Topics in Computer Science: Computer Science Theory
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Computer Science Theory.
ECS 089B
Special Topics in Computer Science: Architecture
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Architecture.
ECS 089C
Special Topics in Computer Science: Programming Languages & Compilers
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Programming Languages & Compilers.
ECS 089D
Special Topics in Computer Science: Operating Systems
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Operating Systems.
ECS 089E
Special Topics in Computer Science: Software Engineering
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Software Engineering.
ECS 089F
Special Topics in Computer Science: Databases
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Databases.
ECS 089G
Special Topics in Computer Science: Artificial Intelligence
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Artificial Intelligence.
ECS 089H
Special Topics in Computer Science: Computer Graphics
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Computer Graphics.
ECS 089I
Special Topics in Computer Science: Networks
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Networks.
ECS 089J
Special Topics in Computer Science: Computer-Aided Design
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Computer-Aided Design.
ECS 089K
Special Topics in Computer Science: Scientific Computing
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Scientific Computing.
ECS 089L
Special Topics in Computer Science: Computer Science
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Computer Science.
ECS 092
Internship in Computer Science
Lower division standing; project approval prior to period of internship.
Supervised work experience in computer science.
ECS 098F
Student Facilitated Course
Consent of Instructor.
Student facilitated course intended primarily for lower division students.
ECS 099
Special Study for Lower Division Students
Consent of Instructor.

ECS 113
Computer Security for Non-Majors
ECS 010 or ECS 030 or ECS 032A or ECS 036A.
Principles, mechanisms, implementation, and sound practices of computer security and data protection. Cryptography, authentication and access control. Internet security. Malicious software. Common vulnerabilities. Practical security in everyday life. Not intended for Computer Science or Computer Science & Engineering majors.
ECS 120
Theory of Computation
(ECS 020 or MAT 108);  (ECS 32B or ECS 36C Recommended).Pass One open to Computer Science, Computer Science Engineering, and Computer Engineering Majors only.
Fundamental ideas in the theory of computation, including formal languages, computability and complexity. Reducibility among computational problems.
ECS 122A
Algorithm Design & Analysis 
ECS 020;  (ECS 060 or ECS 032B or ECS 036C).Pass One open to Computer Science, Computer Science Engineering, and Computer Engineering Majors only.
Complexity of algorithms, bounds on complexity, analysis methods. Searching, sorting, pattern matching, graph algorithms. Algorithm design techniques: divide-conquer, greedy, dynamic programming. Approximation methods. NP-complete problems.
ECS 122B
Algorithm Design & Analysis
ECS 122A;  (ECS 060 or ECS 034 or ECS 036C).Pass One open to Computer Science, Computer Science Engineering, and Computer Engineering Majors only.
Theory and practice of hard problems, and problems with complex algorithm solutions. NP-completeness, approximation algorithms, randomized algorithms, dynamic programming and branch and bound. Theoretical analysis, implementation and practical evaluations. Examples from parallel, string, graph, and geometric algorithms.
ECS 124
Theory & Practice of Bioinformatics
(ECS 010 or ECS 032A or ECS 030 or ECS 036A or ENG 006);  (STA 012 or STA 013 or STA 013Y or STA 032 or STA 100 or STA 131A or MAT 135A or BIM 105);  (BIS 002A or MCB 010).Pass One open to Computer Science, Computer Science Engineering, and Biotechnology majors only.
Fundamental biological, mathematical and algorithmic models underlying bioinformatics and systems biology; sequence analysis, database search, genome annotation, clustering and classification, functional gene networks, regulatory network inference, phylogenetic trees, applications of common bioinformatics tools in molecular biology and genetics.
ECS 127
Cryptography
(ECS 020 or MAT 108);  (ECS 010 or ECS 032A or ECS 030 or ECS 036A).Pass One open to Computer Science and Computer Science Engineering Majors only.
Introduction to the theory and practice of cryptographic techniques used in computer security. Encryption (secret-key and public-key), message authentication, digital signatures, entity authentication, key distribution, and other cryptographic protocols. The social context of cryptography.
ECS 129
Computational Structural Bioinformatics                              
(BIS 002A or MCB 010);  (ECS 010 or ECS 032A or ECS 036A).Pass One open to Computer Science, Computer Science Engineering, and Biotechnology majors only. 
Fundamental biological, chemical and algorithmic models underlying computational structural biology; protein structure and nucleic acids structure; comparison of protein structures; protein structure prediction; molecular simulations; databases and online services in computational structural biology.
ECS 130
Scientific Computation
(ECS 030 or ENG 006 or ECS 032A or ECS 010 or ECS 036A);  (MAT 022A or MAT 067).Pass One open to Computer Science and Computer Science Engineering Majors only.
Matrix-vector approach using MATLAB for floating-point arithmetic, error analysis, data interpolation, least squares data fitting, quadrature, zeros, optimization and matrix eigenvalues and singular values. Parallel computing for matrix operations and essential matrix factorizations.
ECS 132
Probability & Statistical Modeling for Computer Science
(ECS 040 or ECS 034 or ECS 036B);  ECS 050;  MAT 021C;  (MAT 022A or MAT 067).Pass One open to Computer Science and Computer Science Engineering Majors only.
Univariate and multivariate distributions. Estimation and model building. Markov/Hidden Markov models. Applications to data mining, networks, security, software engineering and bioinformatics.
ECS 132
Probability & Statistical Modeling for Computer Science
(ECS 040 or ECS 034 or ECS 036B);  ECS 020;  MAT 021C;  (MAT 022A or MAT 067).Pass One open to Computer Science and Computer Science Engineering Majors only.
Univariate and multivariate distributions. Estimation and model building. Markov/Hidden Markov models. Applications to data mining, networks, security, software engineering and bioinformatics.
ECS 140A
Programming Languages 
ECS 050;  (ECS 060 or ECS 032B or ECS 036C);  ECS 020.Pass One open to Computer Science, Computer Science Engineering, Computer Engineering, and Cognitive Science Majors only.
Syntactic definition of programming languages. Introduction to programming language features including variables, data types, data abstraction, object-orientedness, scoping, parameter disciplines, exception handling. Non-imperative programming languages. Comparative study of several high-level programming languages.
ECS 140A
Programming Languages 
ECS 050;  (ECS 060 or ECS 032B or ECS 036C);  ECS 020;  ECS 150.Pass One open to Computer Science, Computer Science Engineering, Computer Engineering, and Cognitive Science Majors only.
Syntactic definition of programming languages. Introduction to programming language features including variables, data types, data abstraction, object-orientedness, scoping, parameter disciplines, exception handling. Non-imperative programming languages. Comparative study of several high-level programming languages.
ECS 140B
Programming Languages
ECS 140A.Pass One open to Computer Science and Computer Science Engineering Majors only.
Continuation of programming language principles. Further study of programming language paradigms such as functional and logic; additional programming language paradigms such as concurrent (parallel); key implementation issues for those paradigms; and programming language semantics.
ECS 142
Compilers
ECS 140A;  ECS 120;  ECS 122A recommended.Pass One open to Computer Science and Computer Science Engineering Majors only.
Principles and techniques of lexical analysis, parsing, semantic analysis, code generation, and code optimization. Implementation of compilers. 
ECS 145
Scripting Languages & Their Applications
ECS 034 or ECS 036C or ECS 060;  or Consent of Instructor.Pass One open to Computer Science and Computer Science Engineering Majors only.
Goals and philosophy of scripting languages, with Python and R as prime examples. Applications include networking, data analysis and display, and graphical user interfaces (GUIs).
ECS 150
Operating Systems & System Programming
(ECS 034 or ECS 036C or ECS 060);  (ECS 154A or EEC 170).Pass One open to Computer Science, Computer Science Engineering, and Computer Engineering Majors only.
Basic concepts of operating systems and system programming. Processes and interprocess communication/synchronization; virtual memory, program loading and linking; file and I/O subsystems; utility programs. Study of a real operating system.
ECS 152A
Computer Networks
(ECS 060 or ECS 032B or ECS 036C);  (ECS 132 or EEC 161 or MAT 135A or STA 131A or STA 120 or STA 032).Pass One open to Computer Science and Computer Science Engineering Majors only.
Overview of computer networks, TCP/IP protocol suite, computer-networking applications and protocols, transport-layer protocols, network architectures, Internet Protocol (IP), routing, link-layer protocols, local area and wireless networks, medium access control, physical aspects of data transmission, and network-performance analysis. 
ECS 152B
Computer Networks
ECS 150;  (ECS 152A or EEC 173A).Pass One open to Computer Science and Computer Science Engineering Majors only.
TCP/IP protocol suite, computer networking applications, client-server and peer-to-peer architectures, application-layer protocols, transport-layer protocols, transport-layer interfaces, sockets, network programming, remote procedure calls, and network management.
ECS 152C
Advanced Topics in Computer Networks 	 
EEC 173A or ECS 152A.
Advanced topics in computer networks, wireless networks, multimedia networking, traffic analysis and modeling,  network design and management, network simulation and performance analysis, and design projects in communication networks. 
ECS 153
Computer Security
ECS 150;  (ECS 152A or EEC 173A).Pass One open to Computer Science and Computer Science Engineering Majors only.
Principles, mechanisms, and implementation of computer security and data protection. Policy, encryption and authentication, access control, and integrity models and mechanisms; network security; secure systems; programming and vulnerabilities analysis. Study of an existing operating system.
ECS 154A
Computer Architecture
ECS 050 or EEC 070.Pass One open to Computer Science and Computer Science Engineering Majors only.
Introduction to digital design. Interfacing of devices for I/O, memory and memory management. Input/output programming, via wait loops, hardware interrupts and calls to operating system services. Hardware support for operating systems software.
ECS 154B
Computer Architecture
ECS 154A or (EEC 170,  EEC 180A).Pass One open to Computer Science and Computer Science Engineering Majors only.
Hardwired and microprogrammed CPU design. Memory hierarchies. Uniprocessor performance analysis under varying program mixes. Introduction to pipelining and multiprocessors.
ECS 158
Programming on Parallel Architectures
ECS 150;  ECS 154B recommended.Pass One open to Computer Science and Computer Science Engineering Majors only.
Techniques for software development using the shared-memory and message-passing paradigms, on parallel architectures and networks of workstations. Locks, barriers, and other techniques for synchronization. Introduction to parallel algorithms.
ECS 160
 Software Engineering
ECS 140A;  extensive programming experience recommended.Pass One open to Computer Science and Computer Science Engineering Majors only.
Requirements, specification, design, implementation, testing, and verification of large software systems. Study and use of software engineering methodologies. Team programming.
ECS 161
Modern Programming Tools
(ECS 040 or ECS 032B or ECS 036B).Pass One open to Computer Science and Computer Science Engineering Majors only.
Concepts and practice of collaborative software development using modern software tools. 
ECS 162
Web Programming
ECS 030 or ECS 034 or ECS 036B;  or equivalent programming experience in C and the Unix environment.Pass One open to Computer Science and Computer Science Engineering Majors only.
Technical aspects of building websites, including both server-side and client-side software development.  
ECS 163
Information Interfaces               
ECS 060 or ECS 032B or ECS 036C.Pass One open to Computer Science and Computer Science Engineering Majors only.
Art and science of information visualization and interfaces for information systems. Design principles of human-computer interaction. Visual display and navigation of nonspatial and higher dimensional data. Implementations, performance issues, tradeoffs, and evaluation of interactive information systems.
ECS 165A
Database Systems
ECS 060 or ECS 032B or ECS 036C.Pass One open to Computer Science and Computer Science Engineering Majors only.
Database modeling and design (E/R model, relational model), relational algebra, query languages (SQL), file and index structures, query processing, transaction management.
ECS 165B
Database Systems
ECS 165A;  (ECS 060 or ECS 034 or ECS 036C).Pass One open to Computer Science and Computer Science Engineering Majors only.
Data modeling (object-relational, graph-based, spatiotemporal models). Querying semistructured data (XML). Database theory (normalization, integration, provenance). Database programming (stored procedures, embedded SQL, web programming). Advanced topics (data warehousing, parallel data processing).
ECS 170
Introduction to Artificial Intelligence
ECS 060 or ECS 032B or ECS 036C.Pass One open to Computer Science and Computer Science Engineering Majors only.
Design and implementation of intelligent computer systems. Knowledge representation and organization. Memory and inference. Problem solving. Natural language processing.
ECS 170
Introduction to Artificial Intelligence
ECS 060 or ECS 032B or ECS 036C.Pass One open to Computer Science and Computer Science & Engineering Majors only; Pass Two open to undergraduate students only.
Design and implementation of intelligent computer systems. Knowledge representation and organization. Memory and inference. Problem solving. Natural language processing.
ECS 171
Machine Learning
ECS 060 or ECS 032B or ECS 036C;  or Consent of Instructor.  Probability equivalent to STA 032 or STA 131A or ECS 132 recommended; linear algebra equivalent to MAT 22A recommended.Pass One open to Computer Science and Computer Science Engineering Majors only.
Introduction to machine learning. Supervised and unsupervised learning, including classification, dimensionality reduction, regression and clustering using modern machine learning methods. Applications of machine learning to other fields.
ECS 171
Machine Learning
ECS 060 or ECS 032B or ECS 036C;  or Consent of Instructor.  Probability equivalent to STA 032 or STA 131A or ECS 132 recommended; linear algebra equivalent to MAT 22A recommended.Pass One open to Computer Science and Computer Science & Engineering Majors only; Pass Two open to undergraduate students only.
Introduction to machine learning. Supervised & unsupervised learning, including classification, dimensionality reduction, regression & clustering using modern machine learning methods. Applications of machine learning to other fields.
ECS 173
Image Processing & Analysis
(MAT 067 C- or better or MAT 022A C- or better);  (ECS 060 or ECS 032B or ECS 036C).Pass One open to Computer Science and Computer Science Engineering Majors only.
Techniques for automated extraction of high-level information from images generated by cameras, three-dimensional surface sensors, and medical devices. Typical applications include detection of objects in various types of images and describing populations of biological specimens appearing in medical imagery.
ECS 174
Computer Vision
(ECS 060 or ECS 032B or ECS 036C);  (STA 032 or STA 131A or MAT 135A or EEC 161 or ECS 132 recommended); (MAT 022A or MAT 067 recommended).Pass One open to Computer Science and Computer Science and Engineering Majors only. 
Computer vision is the study of enabling machines to "see" the visual world; e.g., understand images and videos. Explores several fundamental topics in the area, including feature detection, grouping and segmentation, and recognition. 
ECS 175
Computer Graphics 
(ECS 060 or ECS 034 or ECS 036C);  (MAT 022A or MAT 067).Pass One open to Computer Science and Computer Science Engineering Majors only.
Principles of computer graphics, with a focus on interactive systems. Current graphics hardware, elementary operations in two-and three-dimensional space, geometric transformations, camera models and interaction, graphics system design, standard graphics APIs, individual projects.
ECS 177
Scientific Visualization	
ECS 175.Pass One open to Computer Science and Computer Science Engineering Majors only.
Computer graphics techniques for generating images of various types of measured or computer-simulated data. Typical applications for these graphics techniques include study of air flows around car bodies, medical data, and molecular structures.    
ECS 178
Geometric Modeling
ECS 175.Pass One open to Computer Science and Computer Science Engineering Majors only.
Interactive graphics techniques for defining and manipulating geometrical shapes used in computer animation, car body design, aircraft design, and architectural design.
ECS 188
Ethics in an Age of Technology
Upper division standing.Pass One open to Computer Science Engineering Majors only; Pass Two open to Computer Science and Computer Science Engineering Majors only.
Foundations of ethics. Views of technology. Technology and human values. Costs and benefits of technology. Character of technological change. Social context of work in computer science and engineering.
ECS 189A
Special Topics in Computer Science: Computer Science Theory
Consent of Instructor.
Special topic in Computer Science Theory.
ECS 189B
Special Topics in Computer Science: Architecture
Consent of Instructor.
Special topic in Architecture.
ECS 189C
Special Topics in Computer Science: Programming Languages & Compilers
Consent of Instructor.
Special topic in Programming Languages & Compilers.
ECS 189D
Special Topics in Computer Science: Operating Systems
Consent of Instructor.
Special topic in Operating Systems.
ECS 189E
Special Topics in Computer Science: Software Engineering
Consent of Instructor.
Special topic in Software Engineering
ECS 189F
Special Topics in Computer Science: Databases
Consent of Instructor.
Special topic Databases.
ECS 189G
Special Topics in Computer Science: Artificial Intelligence
Consent of Instructor.
Special topic in Artificial Intelligence.
ECS 189G
Special Topics in Computer Science: Artificial Intelligence
Consent of Instructor.Open to undergraduate students only.
Special topic in Artificial Intelligence.
ECS 189H
Special Topics in Computer Science: Computer Graphics
Consent of Instructor.
Special topic in Computer Graphics.
ECS 189I
Special Topics in Computer Science: Networks
Consent of Instructor.
Special topic in Networks.
ECS 189J
Special Topics in Computer Science: Computer-Aided Design
Consent of Instructor.
Special topic in Computer-Aided Design.
ECS 189K
Special Topics in Computer Science: Scientific Computing
Consent of Instructor.
Special topic in Scientific Computing.
ECS 189L
Special Topics in Computer Science: Computer Science
Consent of Instructor.
Special topic in Computer Science.
ECS 189M
Special Topics in Computer Security: Computer Security
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Computer Security.
ECS 189N
Special Topics in Bioinformatics & Computational Biology 
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Bioinformatics & Computational Biology.
ECS 190C
Research Group Conferences in Computer Science
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing in Computer Science or Computer Science and Engineering.
Research group conferences.
ECS 190X
Senior Seminar
Senior standing.
Examination of a special topic in a small group setting.
ECS 192
Internship in Computer Science
Completion of a minimum of 84 units; project approval prior to period of internship.
Supervised work experience in computer science.
ECS 193A
Senior Design Project
ECS 160 (can be concurrent);  Senior standing in Computer Science or Computer Science and Engineering or consent of instructor.Pass One open to Computer Science Engineering Majors only; Pass Two open to Computer Science and Computer Science Engineering Majors only.
Responding to real-life client design challenges, student teams plan, implement, and evaluate large-scale projects involving computer and computational systems. Project supervised by a faculty member. Must take ECS 193A & ECS 193B to receive credit.
ECS 193B
Senior Design Project
ECS 193A IP or better.Pass One open to Computer Science Engineering Majors only; Pass Two open to Computer Science and Computer Science Engineering Majors only.
Responding to real-life client design challenges, student teams plan, implement, and evaluate large-scale projects involving computer and computational systems. Project supervised by a faculty member. Must take ECS 193A & ECS 193B to receive credit.
ECS 197T
Tutoring in Computer Science
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to upper division standing.
Tutoring in computer science courses, especially introductory courses.
ECS 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

ECS 198F
Student Facilitated Course
Consent of Instructor.
Student facilitated course intended primarily for upper division students.
ECS 199FB
Student Facilitated Teaching
ECS 199FA;  Consent of Instructor.
STU FAC. Under the supervision of a faculty member, an undergraduate student teaches a course under 098F/198F.
ECS 201A
Advanced Computer Architecture
(ECS 154B or EEC 170);  ECS 150.Pass 1 and Pass 2 open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Modern research topics and methods in computer architecture. Design implications of memory latency and bandwidth limitations. Performance enhancement via within-processor and between-processor  parallelism. Term project involving student-proposed extensions/modifications of work in the research  literature.
ECS 201A
Advanced Computer Architecture
ECS 154A or EEC 170.Pass One and Pass Two open to only Graduate Students in Computer Science.
Modern research topics and methods in computer architecture. Design implications of memory latency and bandwidth limitations. Performance enhancement via within-processor and between-processor parallelism. 
ECS 201B
High-Performance Uniprocessing
ECS 201A.Pass 1 and Pass 2 open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Maximizing uniprocessor performance. Barriers to high performance; solutions to the problems; historical and current processor designs.
ECS 201B
High-Performance Uniprocessing
ECS 201A.Open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Maximizing uniprocessor performance. Barriers to high performance; solutions to the problems; historical and current processor designs.
ECS 201C
Parallel Architectures
ECS 201A.
Evolution of parallel architectures from special-purpose machines to commodity servers. Emphasis on recent machines and applications that drive them.  
ECS 201C
Parallel Architectures
ECS 201A.Open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Evolution of parallel architectures from special-purpose machines to commodity servers. Emphasis on recent machines and applications that drive them.  
ECS 203
Novel Computing Technologies
ECS 201A.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Novel computing technologies that could revolutionize computer architecture. Quantum computing technologies, including algorithms, devices, and fault tolerance. A survey of other unconventional technologies including nanoscale electronics, MEMS devices, biological devices, and nanotechnology. 
ECS 203
Novel Computing Technologies
ECS 201A.Open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Novel computing technologies that could revolutionize computer architecture. Quantum computing technologies, including algorithms, devices, and fault tolerance. A survey of other unconventional technologies including nanoscale electronics, MEMS devices, biological devices, and nanotechnology. 
ECS 220
Theory of Computation
ECS 120;  ECS 122A.Pass 1 and Pass 2 open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only. 
Time and space complexity classes. Reductions, completeness, and the role of randomness. Logic and undecidability.
ECS 220
Theory of Computation
ECS 120;  ECS 122A.Open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Time and space complexity classes. Reductions, completeness, and the role of randomness. Logic and undecidability.
ECS 222A
Design & Analysis of Algorithms
ECS 122A;  STA 031A recommended.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Techniques for designing efficient algorithms, analyzing their complexity and applying these algorithms to a broad range of applications. Methods for recognizing and dealing with difficult problems. 
ECS 222B
Advanced Design & Analysis of Algorithms    
ECS 222A.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Advanced topics in complexity theory. Problem classification. The classes P, NP, P-space, co-NP. Matching and network flow algorithms. Matrix multiplication. Approximation algorithms.
ECS 223
Parallel Algorithms                                  
ECS 222A.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Models of parallel computer systems including PRAMs, loosely coupled systems and interconnection networks. Parallel algorithms for classical problems and general techniques for their design and analysis. Proving lower bounds on parallel computation in several settings.
ECS 224
String Algorithms & Applications in Computational Biology
ECS 122A.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Algorithms that operate on strings. Pattern matching, sets of patterns, regular expression pattern matching, suffix trees and applications, inexact similarity, parametric sequence alignment, applications to DNA sequencing and protein database searching.
ECS 225
Graph Theory
Graduate standing in electrical engineering or computer science or consent of instructor.Open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Fundamental concepts. Planar graphs: Kuratowski's theorem. Packings and coverings. Menger's theorem, representation of cuts, Hamilton graphs, rigid graphs, chordal graphs, graph coloring, graph isomorphism, applications and some algorithms.
ECS 226
Computational Geometry
ECS 175;  ECS 222A.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Mathematics of unstructured data. Algorithms for data structures such as Voronoi diagrams, oct-trees, and arrangements. Applications in computer graphics, concentrating on problems in three-dimensions.
ECS 227
Modern Cryptography
ECS 220 or ECS 222A.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Modern cryptography as a discipline emphasizing formal definitions and proofs of security. One-way functions, pseudo-randomness, encryption, digital signatures, zero-knowledge, secure protocols.
ECS 228
Cryptograpy for E-Commerce
ECS 222A.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Cryptographic primitives and protocols of importance to e-commerce, present and future, including content distribution mechanisms, payment mechanisms, pricing mechanisms, anonymity and privacy mechanisms, fair exchange mechanisms.
ECS 229
Advanced Computational Structural Bioinformatics                      
Graduate standing. Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Algorithmic problems in structural biology; protein structure classification; protein structure prediction (including comparative modeling and ab initio protein structure prediction); molecular simulations (molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo simulations). 
ECS 230
Applied Numerical Linear Algebra                        
ECS 130 or EAD 209 or MAT 167.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Numerical linear algebra (NLA) with emphasis on applications in engineered systems; matrix factorizations; perturbation and rounding error analyses of fundamental NLA algorithms.
ECS 231
Large-Scale Scientific Computation
ECS 130.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Algorithms and techniques for large-scale scientific computation, including basics for high performance computing, iterative methods, discrete approximation, fast Fourier transform, Poisson solvers, particle methods, spectral graph partition and its applications.
ECS 234
Computational Functional Genomics 
ECS 124;  Graduate standing in Computer Science or Life Sciences.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Bioinformatics methods for analysis and inference of functional relationships among genes using large-scale genomic data, including methods for integration of gene expression, promoter sequence, TF-DNA binding and other data, and approaches in modeling of biological networks. 
ECS 235A
Computer & Information Security
ECS 150;  ECS 152A recommended.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Modern topics in computer security, including: protection, access control, operating systems security, network security, applied cryptography, cryptographic protocols, secure programming practices, safe languages, mobile code, malware, privacy and anonymity, and case studies from real-world systems.
ECS 235B
Foundations of Computer & Information Security
ECS 235A;  (ECS 120 and ECS 150 recommended.).Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Theoretical foundations of methods used to protect data in computer and communication systems. Access control matrix and undecidability of security; policies; Bell-LaPadula, Biba, Chinese Wall models; non-interference and non-deducibility; information flow and the confinement problem. 
ECS 236
Computer Security: Intrusion Detection Based Approach
ECS 150;  ECS 153 recommended.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Concepts of intrusion detection, anomaly detection based on machine learning, signature-based detection using pattern matching, automated response to attacks using artificial intelligence planning, tracing intruders based on principal component analysis, security policy languages.
ECS 240
Programming Languages
ECS 140A;  ECS 142.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Advanced topics in programming languages, including formal syntax and semantics, the relation between formal semantics and verification, an introduction to the lambda calculus. Additional topics will include language design principles, alternative programming languages, in-depth semantic theory and models of language implementation.
ECS 242
Translation of Programming Languages
ECS 240.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Lexical analysis, parsing, storage management, symbol table design, semantic analysis and code generation. LR, LALR grammars. Compilercompilers.
ECS 243
Code Generation & Optimization 
ECS 201A or EEC 270.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Compiler optimizations for performance, code size and power reduction. Topics include control- and data-flow analysis, redundancy elimination, loop and cache optimizations, register allocation, local and global instruction scheduling, and modulo scheduling.
ECS 244
Principles of Concurrent Programming
ECS 020;  ECS 150.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Fundamental concepts and applications of concurrent programs; concurrent program verification and derivation; synchronization mechanisms in programming languages; distributed programming techniques; case studies of languages. 
ECS 247
Concurrent Programming Languages
ECS 140A;  ECS 150.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Language design parameters. Models of parallel machines. Load balancing. Scalability. Portability. Efficiency measures. Design and implementation techniques for several classes of concurrent programming languages (such as object-oriented, functional, logic, and constraint programming languages).
ECS 251
Operating Systems
ECS 150.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Models, design, implementation, performance evaluation in operating systems. Algorithms, internal architectures for single processor OS and distributed systems. Concurrency control, recovery, security. OS kernel-level programming. Special topics embedded systems, real-time system, device driver, NPU (Network Processor Unit).
ECS 252
Computer Networks                                                                                         
ECS 152B.Pass 1 and Pass 2 open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Internet protocol based computer networks applications, transport, network layer protocols. High speed LAN technologies: Ethernet, Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM). Delay models in data networks: analysis of multiaccess techniques in polling, ring, random access networks. Multimedia applications requirements and design. 
ECS 253
Network Theory & Applications 
MAT 022A;  MAT 022B;  (STA 013 or STA 013Y or STA 120);  Experience with computer software, or consent of instructor.
Develops the mathematical theory underlying growth, structure and function of networks with applications to physical, social, biological and engineered systems. Topics include network growth, resilience, epidemiology, phase transitions, software and algorithms, routing and search control, cascading failures.
ECS 255
Resource Management in Wireless Communication Networks         
ECS 252A.
Advanced research issues in wireless communication networks, including multi-user diversity and cross-layer optimization, basic network information theory, MIMO systems and the impact on networks, and dynamics spectrum management.
ECS 256
Probability Models for Computer Science
A calculus-based course in probability, such as ECS132, STA 131A, or EEC 161; programming skills and familiarity with matrix algebra.Pass One and Pass Two open to graduate students in Computer Science only.
Probabilistic and statistical models useful in computer/data science.  Applications to networks, bioinformatics, database management, machine learning, software engineering and image processing.
ECS 257
Mobile & Wireless Networks
ECS 252.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Fundamental techniques in design of second generation wireless networks: cellular network and protocols, medium access techniques, handoff control, signaling and mobility management, wireless data works, Internet mobility and Personal Communication Services (PCS). Third generation wideband systems, novel technologies, adhoc networks.
ECS 258
Networking Architecture & Resource Management
ECS 152A or EEC 173A.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science and Electrical and Computer Engineering only.
Concepts and design principles of computer networks. Network architectures, protocol mechanisms and implementation principles (transport/network/data-link layers), network algorithms, router mechanisms, design requirements of applications, network simulation, modeling and performance analysis.
ECS 258
Networking Architecture & Resource Management
ECS 152A or EEC 173A.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science and Electrical and Computer Engineering only.
Concepts and design principles of computer networks. Network architectures, protocol mechanisms and implementation principles (transport/network/data-link layers), network algorithms, router mechanisms, design requirements of applications, network simulation, modeling and performance analysis.
ECS 259
Optical Networks
ECS 252.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Optical networks. Enabling technologies. Multiplexing techniques. WDM. Broadcast networks. Wavelength-routed networks. Network architectures. Protocols. Network algorithms. Device-network interface. Optimization problems. 
ECS 260
Software Engineering
ECS 142;  ECS 160 recommended.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Advanced techniques for domain-specific software reuse.
ECS 261
Program Verification
PHI 112;  or MAT 125 or familiarity with first-order logic; knowledge of an integrative and functional programming language.
Methods of proving correctness of programs with respect to formalspecifications, with attention to those suited for employing automated deduction.Logic background, symbolic execution, techniques suited to iterative programming, methods from denotational semantics, termination, dynamic logic and proofs of concurrent programs.
ECS 262
Formal Specification
ECS 261.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Formal specification of modules, and its relationship to topdownprogramming development and verification. Abstract data types, together with methods for specifying them. Implementations and proofs of implementation. Using specifications to reason about programs. Parameterized types. Constructing good formal specifications.
ECS 265
Distributed Database Systems
ECS 165A.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Concepts of distributed database systems and architectures, distributed database design, distributed query processing and optimization, transaction management and concurrency control, heterogeneous and multidatabase systems.
ECS 266
Spatial Databases
ECS 165A.
Concepts, models, and architectures for spatial databases, spatial access methods, query processing, spatio-temporal data management, moving objects, spatial data mining.  <p>
ECS 267
Wide-Area Distributed Information Systems
ECS 152B or ECS 165A.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Wide-area distributed information systems, data broadcast, multicast, publish/subscribe, service differentiation, information retrieval, Web caching.
ECS 268
Scientific Data & Workflow Management            
ECS 165A.
Scientific data integration, metadata, knowledge representation, ontologies, scientific workflow design and management.
ECS 269
Visual Recognition
ECS 171 or ECS 174;  or equivalent.
Graduate seminar course on computer vision with an emphasis on object recognition, activity recognition, and scene understanding.
ECS 270
Artificial Intelligence
ECS 140A;  ECS 172.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Concepts and techniques underlying the design and implementation of models of human performance on intelligent tasks. Representation of high-level knowledge structures. Models of memory and inference. Natural language and story understanding. Common sense planning and problem solving.
ECS 271
Machine Learning & Discovery                 
ECS 170.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Artificial intelligence techniques for knowledge acquisition by computers. Fundamental problems in machine learning and discovery. Systems that learn from examples, analogies, and solved problems. Systems that discover numerical laws and qualitative relationships. Projects centering on implementation and evaluation.
ECS 272
Information Visualization 
ECS 163 or ECS 175 recommended.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Advanced topics in information visualization: perceptually effective display methods, color design and selection, interaction models and techniques, focus-context techniques, distortion methods, large graph visualization techniques, visual data mining methods, and evaluation methods. 
ECS 273
Applied Visual Computing
Graduate standing.
Visual computing paradigms, current visualization technologies,  principles of 3-d graphics, user interface designs, and exploratory visualization.
ECS 274
Automated Deduction
PHI 112;  or MAT 125 or familiarity with first order logic.
Techniques of mechanical theorem proving. Methods based on resolution and termrewriting. Decision procedures. Induction. Applications to program verification, question/answering and plan generation. Study existing mechanical theorem provers.
ECS 275A
Advanced Computer Graphics
ECS 175 or ECS 177 or ECS 178.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Advanced topics in computer graphics. Hidden surface models, rendering of various surface types, subdivision methods, shading techniques, anti-aliasing, modeling techniques.
ECS 275B
Advanced Computer Graphics
ECS 175 or ECS 177 or ECS 178.Pass 1 and Pass 2 open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Advanced topics in computer graphics and geometric modeling. Topics taken from advanced research papers in computer graphics, image synthesis, visualization and geometric modeling. Discussion of current research in the field.
ECS 276
Advanced Volume Visualization
ECS 177.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Applications, available tools and techniques, the challenges confronting the field of volume visualization, and some of the advanced topics in the field. Primary emphasis on advanced software and hardware techniques to achieve interactive visualization.
ECS 277
Advanced Visualization
ECS 177.
Visualization of 3D data, including scalar fields, vector fields, and medical data.
ECS 278
Computer-Aided Geometric Design
ECS 175.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Mathematical techniques for the definition and manipulation of curves and surfaces. Bezier curves and surfaces, B-spline curves and surfaces, subdivision surfaces, wavelets. Integration into various computer graphics rendering models, visualization systems and computer-aided design systems.
ECS 279
Computer Animation
ECS 175;  or ECS 275.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Surveys current research and fundamental techniques that lie behind character animation tools. Emphasis on improving expressive aspects of movement and how physics, motion capture data, the arts and psychology literature, and interactive techniques can be used towards this goal.
ECS 280
Virtual Reality Technology                        
ECS 175.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Fundamentals and principles of Virtual Reality (VR) technology. Potential and limits for its useful application. Developing a complete virtual reality application.
ECS 289A
Special Topics in Computer Science: Computer Science Theory
Consent of Instructor.
Special topic in Computer Science Theory.
ECS 289B
Special Topics in Computer Science: Architecture
Consent of Instructor.
Special topic in Architecture.
ECS 289C
Special Topics in Computer Science: Programming Languages & Compilers
Consent of Instructor.
Special topic in Programming Languages & Compilers.
ECS 289D
Special Topics in Computer Science: Operating Systems
Consent of Instructor.
Special topic in Operating Systems.
ECS 289E
Special Topics in Computer Science: Software Engineering
Consent of Instructor.
Special topic in Software Engineering.
ECS 289F
Special Topics in Computer Science: Databases
Consent of Instructor.
Special topic in Databases.
ECS 289G
Special Topics in Computer Science: Artificial Intelligence
Consent of Instructor.
Special topic in Artificial Intelligence.
ECS 289H
Special Topics in Computer Science: Computer Graphics
Consent of Instructor.
Special topic in Computer Graphics.
ECS 289I
Special Topics in Computer Science: Networks
Consent of Instructor.
Special topic in Networks.
ECS 289J
Special Topics in Computer Science: Computer-Aided Design
Consent of Instructor.
Special topic in Computer-Aided Design.
ECS 289K
Special Topics in Computer Science: Scientific Computing
Consent of Instructor.
Special topic in Scientific Computing.
ECS 289L
Special Topics in Computer Science: Computer Science
Consent of Instructor.
Special topic in Computer Science.
ECS 289M
Special Topics in Computer Science: Security
Consent of Instructor.
Special topic in Security.
ECS 289N
Special Topics in Bioinformatics & Computational Biology
Consent of Instructor.
Special topic in Bioinformatics & Computational Biology.
ECS 293A
Research in Computer Science 
Graduate standing in computer science.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Study of research topics in computer science, Ph.D. level research methodologies (experimental, applied and theoretical). Study skills necessary to successfully find/solve significant research problems. Finding and successful interacting with a research advisor. Ethical issues in research/collaborative work.
ECS 293B
Research in Computer Science 
Graduate standing in computer science; ECS 293A recommended.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Study of Ph.D. level research methodologies (experimental, applied and theoretical), presenting research results for the computer science community. Study skills necessary to successfully find/solve significant research problems. 
ECS 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

ECS 390
The Teaching of Computer Science
Meet qualifications for teaching assistant and/or associate-in in Computer Science.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science only.
Participation as a teaching assistant or associate-in in a designated engineering course. Methods of leading discussion groups or laboratory sections, writing and grading quizzes, use of laboratory equipment, and grading laboratory reports.
ECS 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Graduate standing.

EDU 065A
Foundations for University Success: Introduction to the University System
Consent of Instructor.  Student must be a part of an approved Foundations for University Success program.
Introduction to resources supporting first year student academic success and transition to a tier one research university.
EDU 065B
Foundations for University Success: Introduction to Research at a Tier 1 University
Consent of Instructor.  Student must be a part of an approved Foundations for University Success program.
Development of important skills necessary for research including critical thinking, study skills, writing skills, and presentation skills.
EDU 065B
Foundations for University Success: Introduction to Research at a Tier 1 University
Consent of Instructor.  Student must be a part of an approved Foundations for University Success program.
Development of important skills necessary for research including critical thinking, study skills, writing skills, and presentation skills.
EDU 065C
Foundations for University Success: Internships, Graduate School & Careers
Consent of Instructor.  Student must be a part of an approved Foundations for University Success program.
Resources to explore academic and career connections and opportunities including internships, volunteer opportunities, graduate schools and careers.
EDU 092
Internship
Consent of Instructor.Enrollment dependent on availability of intern placements.
Internship as a teachers aide or tutor in K-12 classrooms under the supervision of a faculty member.
EDU 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Primarily for lower division students.
EDU 151T
Language Development in the Chicano Child
Acceptance in Teaching Credential Program.Open to UC Davis Teacher Credential candidates only.
Bilingualism, first and second language acquisition, bilingual education, language assessment, Chicano Spanish and the role of dialect varieties in the classroom.
EDU 152
Academic Spanish for Bilingual Teachers
Acceptance in Teaching Credential Program or consent of instructor.
Communicative class taught in Spanish focused on the development of Spanish communication skills for current and/or future bilingual teachers. Main topics are related to school content areas in bilingual settings, with an emphasis on standard and Southwest Spanish dialects.
EDU 153
Diversity in the K-12 Classroom
Acceptance in Teaching Credential Program.
Analysis of research on learning styles among culturally diverse students with review and evaluation of responsive curricula and classroom teaching techniques. The ethnographic interview as a research tool.
EDU 160A
Introduction to Peer Counseling
Consent of Instructor.
Introduction to peer counseling techniques and development of peer counseling skills.
EDU 160B
Issues in Peer Counseling
Consent of Instructor.
In-depth review and development of skills for specific counseling topics.
EDU 173
Language Development
LIN 001 or LIN 001Y;  or Consent of Instructor.  LIN 103A, LIN 103B recommended.
Theory and research on children's acquisition of their native language, including the sound system, grammatical systems, and basic semantic categories.
EDU 180A
Computers in Education
Acceptance in Teacher Credential Program.Restricted to Teaching Credential Majors.
Applications of computers in education as instructional, intellectual, and communication tools.  
EDU 180B
Computers in Education
EDU 180A;  Acceptance in Teacher Credential Program.Restricted to Teaching Credential Majors.
Applications of computers in education as instructional, intellectual, and communication tools.  
EDU 180C
Computers in Education
EDU 180B;  Acceptance in Teacher Credential Program.Restricted to Teaching Credential Majors.
Applications of computers in education as instructional, intellectual, and communication tools.  
EDU 181
Teaching in Science & Mathematics
Consent of Instructor.  Major in mathematics, science, or engineering; or completion of a one-year sequence of science or calculus.Limited to 40 students per section.
Exploration of effective teaching practices based on examination of how middle school students learn math and science. Selected readings, discussion and field experience in middle school classrooms. 
EDU 182
Computer Project for Curricular Integration
Consent of Instructor.
Design and implementation of a curricular unit to integrate computer technology into a K-12 classroom setting. A project-based seminar intended for students with substantial prior experience with instructional use of computers and related technologies. 
EDU 183
Teaching High School Mathematics & Science
Major in mathematics, science, or engineering; or completion of a one-year sequence of science or calculus and consent of the instructor.Limited to 40 students per section.
Exploration and creation of effective teaching practices based on examination of how high school students learn mathematics and science. Field experience in high school classrooms.
EDU 192
Internship
Consent of Instructor.
Internship as a tutor, teacher's aide, or peer counselor in a school or educational counseling setting under the supervision of a faculty member. May be taught abroad.
EDU 197T
Tutoring in Education
Consent of Instructor.
Leading of small voluntary discussion groups affiliated with the School's upper division courses under the supervision of, and at the option of, the course instructor, who will submit a written evaluation of the student's work.
EDU 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.
EDU 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

EDU 200
Educational Research
Introductory statistics or consent of instructor.
Defining educational research questions, reviewing relevant literature,developing research designs, developing research instruments, selecting appropriate data analysis procedures, and writing research projects. A case problem will provide practice in designing and reporting research.
EDU 201
Qualitative Research in Education
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Examines the design and conduct of educational research using non-numerical data (e.g., text, discourse, imagery and artifacts). Focuses on issues (e.g., validity, reliability, generalizability, ethics) and reporting genres (e.g., narrative accounts, case studies, and arguments).
EDU 203
Educational Testing & Evaluation
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Introduces the theoretical assumptions underlying traditional test construction, as well as the basic statistical principles involved in the design, evaluation, and interpretation of standardized tests. Introduces the debates surrounding the uses of different kinds of tests and evaluation tools.
EDU 204A
Quantitative Methods in Educational Research:  Analysis of Correlational Designs
Introductory statistics or consent of instructor.
Methods for analysis of correlational data in educational research. Topics include multiple correlation and regression, discriminant analysis, logistic regression, and canonical correlation. Emphasis on conceptual understanding of the techniques and use of statistical software.
EDU 204B
Quantitative Methods in Educational Research:  Experimental Designs
Introductory statistics or consent of instructor.
Methods for analysis of experimental data in educational research. Topics include ANOVA, fixed v. random effects models, repeated measures ANOVA, analysis of co-variance, MANOVA, chi square tests, small sample solutions to t and ANOVA.
EDU 205B
Ethnographic Research in Schools II: Field-Based Research Projects
EDU 205A.
Student research projects in specific schools with cooperative critical analysis of the design, data collection, and inferencing by researchers. Students will continue to meet with instructor as a group throughout the quarter to discuss specific projects.
EDU 206A
Inquiry into Classroom Practice: Traditions & Approaches
Acceptance in Teacher Credential Program.
Introduction to traditions and approaches of teachers conducting research in their own classrooms: purposes, focal areas, methods of data collection and analysis, and written genre conventions.
EDU 206B
Inquiry into Classroom Practice: Application of Teacher Research Approaches
EDU 206A;  or Consent of Instructor.Open to Graduate Teaching Credential students.
Analysis and application of teacher research through the development, implementation and evaluation of a short-term classroom research-based intervention. Particular attention to research that enhances learning of English language learners and under-performing students.
EDU 206C
Inquiry into Classroom Practice: Study Design
EDU 206B;  or Consent of Instructor.Open to Graduate MA Credential students.
Proposal development for classroom-based inquiry designed to address student learning needs.  Mixed methods research design and preliminary data collection approaches. Design and application of baseline student assessment for proposal development. Literature review. Data collection in K-12 classrooms required.
EDU 206D
Inquiry into Classroom Practice: Data Analysis & Research Reporting
EDU 206C;  or Consent of Instructor.Open to Graduate MA Credential students.
Support of the inquiry in EDU 206C through continuous collaborative critique and feedback resulting in the writing and presentation of a research study.
EDU 207
Concepts of the Curriculum
Consent of Instructor.
Development of the skills of philosophical analysis and argument for the establishment of a point of view, in the consideration of curriculum theory and practice. Classical and contemporary approaches to subject matter and activity emphases, hidden curriculum, and moral education.
EDU 208
Presenting Educational Research in Written Reports
Consent of Instructor.
Rhetorical and substantive challenges of presenting educational research through written reports; research rhetoric and genres; competing discourse conventions of educational research, policy, and practice; the social organization of publishing educational research.
EDU 213
Individual Assessment
Introductory statistics or consent of instructor.
Theories of intellectual functioning and the measurement of cognitive abilities in school-aged children. Supervised practice in administration and scoring of contemporary tests for children including the WISC-R, the WAIS-R, the Stanford Binet, the McCarthy Scales of Children's Ability.
EDU 215
Research on Achievement Motivation in Education
Consent of Instructor.
Analysis and critique of recent research on cognitive processes related to achievement motivation in school settings. Topics include self-determination theory, attribution theory, goal theory, intrinsic and extrinsic motivation, learned helplessness. psychological reactance, gender and culture, and research design.
EDU 221
Culture & Social Organization of Schools
Consent of Instructor.
Culture and social organization of schools. Examines perspectives of social researchers, educational policy-makers, and school members and their implications for educational research, policy and practice.
EDU 223
Education & Social Policy
Consent of Instructor.
Focuses on understanding the social and political context of education in the U.S. and California and how education policy is formed in the broader public arena. Develops skills in educational policy analysis. (Former EDU 237.)
EDU 226
Culture & Social Organization of Higher Education
Consent of Instructor.
Critical study of culture and social organization of higher education institutions policies and functions in the U.S., with some attention to other countries.
EDU 236
Application of Hierarchical Linear Models in Education Research
EDU 204A;  Or similar course with permission of the instructor.
Application of hierarchical linear models in education research across multiple areas, such as policy, curriculum, and assessment. Develop working knowledge of hierarchical linear modeling and an understanding of its use in existing research as well as student's work.
EDU 238
Participatory Action Research (PAR)
Introductory research methods course recommended.
Principles and strategies of PAR and related methodologies that emphasize collaborating with those affected by the issue being researched in order to educate, take action or effect social change. Conduct interviews with potential collaborators, case analyses and research proposals.
EDU 239
Interview Methods
EDU 201 or equivalent course recommended.
Introduction to qualitative interviewing, focused in particular on narrative and self-story as both practical method and theoretical stance. Complete a case-focused interview project during the course: designing an interview protocol, conducting the interview, transcribing, analyzing, and presenting their research.
EDU 242
Research on Text Comprehension
Consent of Instructor.
Analysis of recent research related to cognitive processing of written texts. Topics include word decoding, schema theory, background knowledge, assimilation, accommodation, working memory, processing depth, vocabulary acquisition, sentence-level processes, text-level processes, text structure, implications for curriculum and instruction.
EDU 243
Research on the Teaching & Learning of Writing
Consent of Instructor.
Study of issues in research on composition; history of composition studies; data analysis techniques; product and process approaches; cognitive and social perspectives.
EDU 246
Reading as a Social & Cultural Process
EDU 211 recommended.
Recent theoretical and empirical work on reading in social contexts. Topics include reading as an individual interactive process; reading as a social and cultural process; critical perspectives on reading; implications of contrastive theoretical perspectives for curriculum and instruction in reading.
EDU 249
Discourse Analysis in Educational Settings
An introductory linguistics or sociolinguistics course or consent of instructor.
Examines form and type in discourse (e.g., narration, conversation, routines), approaches to discourse analysis, and research on classroom discourse (lessons, teaching/learning interactional sequences). Final term paper is an analysis of discourse data tape-recorded by student in a field setting.
EDU 253
Language & Literacy in Linguistic Minorities
Acceptance in Teacher Credential Program.
Analysis and application of research on oral language development and literacy in language minority students, through the development, implementation, and evaluation of research-based language arts curriculum.
EDU 255
Curriculum Development & Evaluation in Mathematics
Consent of Instructor.
Analysis of curricular issues and goals in mathematics education, including long-term trends, current status and influences, proposed changes, and evaluation issues. Selected curriculum projects examined.
EDU 256A
Research in Mathematics Education
Consent of Instructor.
Examination of research process in mathematics education; review of critical productive problems identified by researchers; evolution of trends, issues, theories and hypotheses in various areas of mathematics education research. Emphasizes foundations.
EDU 256B
Research in Mathematics Education
Consent of Instructor.
Current research issues and activities in mathematics education: status, trends, theories and hypotheses. Formulation of research questions and design of studies. Projection of future directions for research.
EDU 257
Computer Technology in Mathematics Education
Consent of Instructor.
Roles of calculators, computers, and graphing calculators in mathematics education will be addressed, with emphasis on the impact of these technologies on curriculum reform. Selected efforts to integrate technology into mathematics instruction will be examined.
EDU 260
The Modern History of Science Education
Consent of Instructor.
History of curricular issues and goals in science education from the late-19th century forward, including long-term trends, current status and influences, proposed changes, and evaluation issues. National science standards and curriculum projects.
EDU 262A
Research Topics in Science Education I
Consent of Instructor.
Research process and product in science education; review of critical science education issues; evolution of trends, theories and hypotheses in various areas of science education research. Survey of current major research in science education.
EDU 264
Scientific Literacy & Science Education Reform
Consent of Instructor.
Current trends in science education reform locally, regionally, and nationally focusing on scientific literacy. Equity, access and "science for all."
EDU 275A
Effective Instruction: Curriculum & Assessment-Theory, Research, & Practice
Acceptance in Teacher Credential Program.Restricted to Teaching Credential majors.
Examination of contemporary theories of curriculum development, research about the relationship among instructional planning, classroom assessment, and student learning to guide teaching practice.
EDU 275B
Effective Instruction: English Language Development & Instructing English Language Learners
Acceptance in the Teaching Credential Program.
Analysis and application of English language acquisition and development research to teaching practice. Particular attention to research that enhances learning of English language learners and under-performing students. 
EDU 280A
Inquiry & Practice: Qualitative Research for Educational Leaders
Admission into the CANDEL EdD program or consent of instructor.
Prepares students to understand the nature/assumptions/logic of qualitative methodology as applied to educational settings, focusing on issues of design/conceptualization/ interpretation/application of qualitative research procedures. Use these methods in conducting studies in their educational settings.
EDU 280B
Inquiry & Practice: Quantitative Research for Educational Leaders
Admission into the CANDEL EdD program or consent of instructor.
Focus is on field-based and general quantitative research methods in education. Acquire skills and knowledge to collect, organize, analyze, and interpret univariate and multivariate quantitative data in educational research, dissertation projects, and field-based projects.
EDU 280C
Inquiry & Practice: Research Design & Application for Educational Leaders
Admission into the CANDEL EdD program or consent of instructor.
Educational leaders are introduced to qualitative, quantitative, and mixed-methods educational research methods and learn to frame research questions, identify data/data sources, use descriptive statistics, critically examine research studies, make sense of educational research/policy, and conduct independent studies.
EDU 281A
Problem-Based Learning Courses: Part 1
Admission into the CANDEL EdD program or consent of instructor.
Students identify problems from their educational settings, engage in data collection/analysis, write-up the process/results, and present to class. Work may become a dissertation proposal, if the problem or its extension is of sufficient interest and value.
EDU 281B
Problem-Based Learning Courses: Part 2
Admission into the CANDEL EdD program or consent of instructor.
Continuation of part one.
EDU 281C
Problem-Based Learning Courses: Part 3
Admission into the CANDEL EdD program or consent of instructor.
Continuation of part two.
EDU 282A
Beginning Issues & Practices: Contemporary Educational Leadership
Admission into the CANDEL EdD program or consent of instructor.
Explore the history and emergent relationships among leadership theories/practice and their application to current educational settings. Reflect on and refine their personal theory of leadership.
EDU 282B
Beginning Issues & Practices: Diversity Issues for Educational Leaders
Admission into the CANDEL EdD program or consent of instructor.
Diversity of stakeholders and community issues in California schools and colleges will be explored. Emphasis will be placed on the interaction between underrepresented segments of society and educational institutions. Best Practices in leading diverse schools will be explored.
EDU 283A
Advanced Issues & Practices: Leadership Across Communities
Admission into the CANDEL EdD program or consent of instructor.
Examine the theory/practice/process of leadership in community-building and collaboration in/across communities, while addressing the utilization of human and material resources and the creation of partnerships, community linkages, and collaborative efforts.
EDU 283B
Advanced Issues & Practices: Leadership & Student Services
Admission into the CANDEL EdD program or consent of instructor.
Practical and theoretical perspectives for building a sense of vision to lead the profession of student affairs and to meet the needs of the whole student.
EDU 284A
Policy: History & Theory of Educational Policy
Admission into the CANDEL EdD program or consent of instructor.
Learn/analyze the history/theory of educational policy. Explore how education leaders have/can positively influence the  process and implement effective policies in their local institutions. Policy issues covered: educational opportunity, equity, access, regulation, testing, tenure, accountability.
EDU 284B
Policy: Formulating & Influencing Policy
Admission into the CANDEL EdD program or consent of instructor.
Conduct critical analyses of policy at the federal, judicial, state, regional and local levels. Specific California and federal policy environment structures, processes and people will be examined for intended consequences, ethical dilemmas, social justice and equity issues.
EDU 284C
Policy: Possibilities & Limitations of Educational Policy in a Democracy
Admission into the CANDEL EdD program or consent of instructor.
Critically examine the democratic purposes of education in light of existing National, State, and local policy reform efforts. Questions include, "In what ways are these reforms and policies guided by democratic ideas and challenged by those ideals."
EDU 285A
Educational Finance, Human Resources, & Law: Integrated Seminar: Human & Financial Assets: Allocations, & Budgets
Admission into the CANDEL EdD program or consent of instructor.
Topics include: education finance theory, contemporary finance policy issues, intergovernmental relations, effective resource management, budget analysis and preparation.
EDU 285B
Educational Finance, Human Resources, & Law: Ethical & Legal Issues in Education
Admission into the CANDEL EdD program or consent of instructor.
Human resource and legal concepts and activities governing decisions of school leaders in public education. Attention to theory, application, and practice of personnel and risk management, curriculum, student services, teacher rights, torts, student rights.
EDU 285C
Educational Finance, Human Resources, & Law: Human Resources & Personnel
Admission into the CANDEL EdD program or consent of instructor.
Human resource management research and theory and for applying human resource techniques in the educational setting.
EDU 286A
Organizational Structures & Change: Data-Driven Decision-Making for Change
Admission into the CANDEL EdD program or consent of instructor.
Use and examine multiple sources of information and data and trends found in making quality decisions to improve P-12/community college settings and addressing problems at sites. Learn limitations of these data sources.
EDU 286B
Organizational Structures & Change: Curriculum & Instruction Issues in Education
Admission into the CANDEL EdD program or consent of instructor.
Addresses the historical development of various curriculum and instructional methodologies found in public and private schools and colleges, and their impact on current curriculum development and reform efforts at the national, state and local level.
EDU 287
CANDEL Dissertation Seminars
Admission into the CANDEL EdD program or consent of instructor.
Third-year seminars encourage students to complete dissertations within the year. Cohort members meet together in every three-week meetings with faculty members and share their writing, data collection, analysis, discussion of results, development of conclusions/implications. 
EDU 287D
CANDEL Dissertation
Consent of Instructor.  Passing of qualifying exams in CANDEL program and advancement to candidacy.
Cohort members continue to meet with faculty and share their writing, data collection, analysis, development of conclusions/implications. 
EDU 291
Proseminar in Education
Admission to the M.A. or Ph.D. graduate program in Education.
Professional induction into educational research field and Graduate Group in Education at UC Davis. Introduction to landscape of educational research methodologies, purposes and theories. Analysis of debates within field. Investigation of K-12 educational outreach efforts at UC Davis.
EDU 292
Special Topics in Education
Consent of Instructor.
Selected topics in education. Designed to facilitate preparation for the qualifying examination or dissertation. Students will critically analyze scholarly work including their own works in progress.
EDU 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Group study.
EDU 299
Individual Study
Consent of Instructor.
Individual study under the direction of a faculty member.
EDU 299D
Research
Consent of Instructor.
Research for individual graduate students.
EDU 300
Reading in the Elementary School
Acceptance in Teacher Credential Program.
Principles, procedures, and curriculum materials for teaching of reading. Includes decoding skills with a special emphasis on phonics, comprehension skills, study skills, and reading in the content areas.
EDU 300A
Reading in the Elementary School, Part A
Acceptance in Teacher Credential Program.
Principles, procedures, and curriculum materials for teaching of reading. Includes decoding skills with a special emphasis on phonics, comprehension skills, study skills, and reading in the content areas.
EDU 300B
Reading in the Elementary Schools, Part B
Acceptance in Teacher Credential Program.
Principles, procedures, and curriculum materials for teaching of reading. Includes decoding skills with a special emphasis on phonics, comprehension skills, study skills, and reading in the content areas
EDU 301
Reading in the Secondary School
Graduate standing, enrollment in the secondary credential program or consent of instructor.
Principles, procedures, and materials to help secondary school teachers improve the reading competence of students. Strategies for enhancing learning through reading and writing in all disciplines, with special attention to linguistically diverse populations.
EDU 301A
Teaching Literacy in High School Contexts
Consent of Instructor.  Acceptance in Teacher Credential Program.Restricted to students enrolled in the secondary credential program.
Focuses on secondary school literacy practices and strategies for engaging English-speaking and bilingual students with textual, image, and digital literacies across content areas. Covers reading and writing, the Common Core and Language Proficiency standards.
EDU 301B
Teaching Literacy in High School Contexts
Acceptance in Teacher Credential Program.Restricted to students enrolled in the secondary credential program.
Focuses on secondary school literacy practices and strategies for engaging English-speaking and bilingual students with textual, image, and digital literacies across content areas. Covers reading and writing, the Common Core and Language Proficiency standards. 
EDU 302
Language Arts in the Elementary School
Acceptance in Teacher Credential Program.
Principles, procedures, and materials for the teaching of oral and written expression, listening skills, drama, and children's literature in elementary schools.
EDU 303
Art Education in the Elementary School
Acceptance in Teacher Credential Program.
Understanding the principles of education in the arts through participation. Development of concepts, introduction to media, and techniques suitable for the elementary school with emphasis on cross-discipline exploration.
EDU 304A
Teaching in the Elementary Schools
Acceptance in Teacher Credential Program.
Supervised teaching in regular classrooms in elementary schools. Selection and organization of teaching materials. Introduction to techniques of diagnosing school achievement of children.
EDU 304B
Teaching in the Elementary Schools
Acceptance in Teacher Credential Program.
Supervised teaching in regular classrooms in elementary schools. Current conceptions of elementary school curriculum, emphasis on contributionsfrom the social, biological, and physical sciences. Emphasis on effective teaching methods.
EDU 304C
Teaching in the Elementary Schools
Acceptance in Teacher Credential Program.
Supervised teaching in regular classrooms in elementary schools. Evaluation of teaching materials including instructional technology. Current elementary school curriculum with emphasis on contributions from fine arts and humanities.
EDU 305A
Teaching in the Middle Grades
Acceptance in Teacher Credential Program.
Supervised teaching in regular or special education classrooms in middlegrades. Current conceptions of the middle-grades curriculum with emphasis on social, biological, and physical sciences. Effective teaching methods.
EDU 306A
Teaching in the Secondary Schools
Acceptance in Teacher Credential Program.
Supervised teaching in regular secondary classrooms. Techniques for classroom communications; constructing goals and objectives; assessment of learning; special problems of adolescents; instructional technology.
EDU 306B
Teaching in the Secondary Schools
Acceptance in Teacher Credential Program.
Supervised teaching in regular secondary classrooms. Techniques for classroom communications; constructing goals and objectives; assessment of learning; special problems of adolescents; instructional technology.
EDU 306C
Teaching in the Secondary Schools
Acceptance in Teacher Credential Program.
Supervised teaching in regular secondary classrooms. Techniques for classroom communications; constructing goals and objectives; assessment of learning; special problems of adolescents; instructional technology.
EDU 307
Methods in Elementary Science
Acceptance in Teacher Credential Program.
Principles, procedures, and materials for teaching the biological and physical sciences in elementary schools.
EDU 308
Methods in Elementary Social Studies
Acceptance in Teacher Credential Program.
Principles, procedures, and materials for teaching history and the social sciences in elementary schools.
EDU 309
The Teaching of Mathematics, K-9
Acceptance in Teacher Credential Program.
Mathematics curriculum and teaching methods for K-9 reflecting the needs of California's diverse student populations.
EDU 309A
The Teaching of Mathematics, K9, Part A
Acceptance in Teacher Credential Program.
Mathematics curriculum and teaching methods for K9 reflecting the needs of California's diverse student populations.
EDU 309B
The Teaching of Mathematics, K9, Part B
Acceptance in Teacher Credential Program.
Mathematics curriculum and teaching methods for K9 reflecting the needs of California's diverse student populations.
EDU 310
Teaching as Reflective Practice
Consent of Instructor.Acceptance in Teacher Credential Program.
Presentation of issues related to classroom instruction and professional practice, reflections on classroom instruction and other documentation related to student teaching experience.
EDU 322A
Pedagogical Preparation for Secondary Social Science  I
Acceptance in Teacher Credential Program.
Introduction to teaching methods and curriculum approaches for secondary social science teaching. State and national curriculum standards; application of learning theory to effective instruction; interdisciplinary teaching and active learning approaches; effective teaching strategies for English learners.
EDU 322B
Pedagogical Preparation for Secondary Social Science II
Acceptance in Teacher Credential Program.
Intermediate teaching methods and curriculum approaches for secondary social science teaching. Interdisciplinary approaches to teaching major themes across social science content areas; teaching potentially controversial social science topics; teaching democratic civic values, student assessment and evaluation.
EDU 323A
Physical Science in the Secondary School
Acceptance in Teacher Credential Program.
Activity-based overview of concepts and processes in secondary school physical sciences. Emphasis upon philosophy, appropriate teaching methods, materials, assessment and evaluation of learning.
EDU 323B
Life Sciences in the Secondary School
Acceptance in Teacher Credential Program.
Activity-based overview of concepts and processes in secondary school biology and life sciences. Emphasis on philosophy, appropriate teaching methods, materials, assessment and evaluation of learning, and issues.
EDU 324A
Methods & Technology in Secondary Mathematics I
Consent of Instructor.  Acceptance in Teacher Credential Program.
Introduction to methods and curriculum for teaching mathematics at the secondary level. Introduction to applications of computer technology as instructional, intellectual, and communication tools for mathematics teachers.
EDU 324B
Methods in Secondary Mathematics II
Consent of Instructor.  Acceptance in Teacher Credential Program.
Expansion of methods and curriculum for teaching mathematics at the secondary level. Intermediate applications of computer technology as instructional, intellectual, and communication tools in mathematics teaching.
EDU 325
Research & Methods in Secondary English Language Arts
Consent of Instructor.  Acceptance in Teacher Credential Program.
Research on teaching and learning in the language arts. Principles, procedures and materials for improving the writing, reading and oral language of secondary students, with special attention to students from culturally and linguistically diverse populations.
EDU 326
Teaching Language Minority Students in Secondary Schools: Methods & Research
Consent of Instructor.  Acceptance in Teacher Credential Program.
Research on principles, procedures and curricula for teaching discipline-specific concepts to language-minority students in secondary schools. Second-language acquisition principles and instructional strategies.
EDU 327A
Teaching Methods for Secondary Foreign Language/Spanish, Part I
Acceptance in Teacher Credential Program.
Introduction to methods for teaching Spanish as a foreign and a heritage language in secondary schools. State and National Standards. Theories on second language acquisition. Lesson plans. Effective teaching strategies and class management.
EDU 327B
Teaching Methods for Secondary Foreign Language/Spanish, Part II
Acceptance in Teacher Credential Program.
Continuation to methods for teaching Spanish as a foreign and a heritage language in secondary schools. Research and practice on foreign and heritage language teaching. Expansion of effective teaching strategies and class management.
EDU 398
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

EDU 399
Individual Study
Consent of Instructor.

EEC 010
Introduction to Digital & Analog Systems
(PHY 009C (can be concurrent) or PHY 009HD (can be concurrent));  (ECS 030 or ECS 036B or EEC 007);  ENG 017;  Consent of Instructor.Open to Electrical and Computer Engineering sophomores.
Interactive and practical introduction to fundamental concepts of electrical and computer engineering by implementing electronic systems, which can be digitally controlled and interrogated, with a programmable microcontroller with the ability to program the electrical connections between analog and digital components.
EEC 010
Introduction to Digital & Analog Systems
(PHY 009C (can be concurrent) or PHY 009HD (can be concurrent));  (ECS 030 or ECS 036B or EEC 007);  ENG 017;  Consent of Instructor.
Interactive and practical introduction to fundamental concepts of electrical and computer engineering by implementing electronic systems, which can be digitally controlled and interrogated, with a programmable microcontroller with the ability to program the electrical connections between analog and digital components.
EEC 018
Digital Systems I
ENG 017.
Introduction to digital system design including combinational logic design, sequential and asynchronous circuits, computer arithmetic, memory systems and algorithmic state machine design; computer aided design (CAD) methodologies and tools.
EEC 089A
Special Topics in Electromagnetics
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Electromagnetics.
EEC 089B
Special Topics in Physical Electronics
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Physical Electronics.
EEC 089C
Special Topics in Active & Passive Circuits
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Active & Passive Circuits.
EEC 089D
Special Topics in Signals & Systems
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Signals & Systems.
EEC 089E
Special Topics in Computer Systems & Software
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Computer Systems & Software.
EEC 089F
Special Topics in Digital System Design
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Digital System Design.
EEC 090C
Research Group Conference in Electrical & Computer Engineering
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.
Research group conferences.
EEC 090X
Lower Division Seminar
Consent of Instructor.
Examination of a special topic in a small group setting.
EEC 092
Internship in Electrical & Computer Engineering
Lower division standing; project approval prior to period of internship.
Supervised work experience in Electrical & Computer Engineering.
EEC 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

EEC 100
Circuits II
ENG 017 C- or better;  MAT 022B.Restricted to the following majors: Electrical Engineering, Computer Engineering, Computer Science & Engineering, Electronic Materials Engineering, Electrical Engineering/Materials Science, Optical Science & Engineering, Biomedical Engineering, Applied Physics, Electrical & Computer Engineering graduate students.
Theory, application, and design of analog circuits. Methods of analysis including frequency response, SPICE simulation, and Laplace transform. Operational amplifiers and design of active filters.  
EEC 105C
EE-Emerge 3
EEC 105B.
Work in groups to present electronic exhibits to the public.
EEC 110A
Electronic Circuits I
EEC 100;  EEC 140A (can be concurrent).
Use and modeling of nonlinear solid-state electronic devices in basic analog and digital circuits. Introduction to the design of transistor amplifiers and logic gates.
EEC 110B
Electronic Circuits II
EEC 110A.
Analysis and design of integrated circuits.  Single-stage amplifiers, cascaded amplifier stages, differential amplifiers, current sources, frequency response, and return-ratio analysis of feedback amplifiers.
EEC 111
Digital Electronic Circuits
EEC 100.Open to Computer Engineering majors only.
MOS device fundamentals, introduction to the design of CMOS logic gates, layout, circuits, and modeling. Examination of voltage transfer characteristics, and propagation delay.
EEC 112
Communication Electronics
EEC 110A;  EEC 150A;  EEC 110B recommended.
Electronic circuits for analog and digital communication, including oscillators, mixers, tuned amplifiers, modulators, demodulators, and phase-locked loops. Circuits for amplitude modulation (AM) and frequency modulation (FM) are emphasized.
EEC 116
VLSI Design
EEC 110A;  EEC 018 or 180A recommended.
CMOS devices, layout, circuits, and functional units; VLSI fabrication and design methodologies.
EEC 118
Digital Integrated Circuits
EEC 110A;  (EEC 018 or EEC 180A).
Analysis and design of digital integrated circuits. Emphasis on MOS logic circuit families. Logic gate construction, voltage transfer characteristics, propagation delay, and power consumption. Regenerative circuits, sequential elements, interconnect, RAMs, ROMs, and PLAs.
EEC 119A
Integrated Circuit Design Project
EEC 116 or EEC 118.
Design course involving architecture, circuit design, physical design, and validation through extensive simulation of a digital or mixed-signal integrated circuit of substantial complexity under given design constraints. Team project that includes a final report.
EEC 119B
Integrated Circuit Design Project
EEC 119A.
Design course involving architecture, circuit design, physical design, and validation through extensive simulation of a digital or mixed-signal integrated circuit of substantial complexity under given design constraints.  Team project that includes a final report.
EEC 130A
Electromagnetics I
MAT 021D;  (PHY 009C or PHY 009HD);  ENG 017.
Basics of static electric and magnetic fields and fields in materials. Work and scalar potential. Maxwell's equations in integral and differential form. Plan waves in lossless media. Lossless transmission lines.
EEC 130B
Introductory Electromagnetics II
EEC 130A.
Plane wave propagation in lossy media, reflections, guided waves, simple modulated waves and dispersion, and basic antennas.
EEC 132A
RF & Microwaves in Wireless Communication
EEC 110A;  EEC 130B.
Study of Radio Frequency and Microwave theory and practice for design of wireless electronic systems. Transmission lines, microwave integrated circuits, circuit analyis of electromagnetic energy transfer systems, the scattering parameters. 
EEC 132B
RF & Microwaves in Wireless Communication
EEC 132A.
Passive RF and microwave device analysis, design, fabrication, and testing for wireless applications. RF and microwave filter and coupler design. Introductory analysis and design of RF and microwave transistor amplifiers.
EEC 132C
RF & Microwaves in Wireless Communications
EEC 132B.
RF and microwave amplifier theory and design, including transistor circuit models, stability considerations, noise models and low noise design. Theory and design of microwave transistor oscillators and mixers. Wireless system design and analysis. 
EEC 133
Electromagnetic Radiation & Antenna Analysis
EEC 130B.
Properties of electromagnetic radiation; analysis and design of antennas: ideal cylindrical, small loop, aperture, and arrays; antenna field measurements.
EEC 134A
RF/Microwave Systems Design
EEC 130B or EEC 110B or EEC 150A.Limited to 24 students.
Board-level RF design, fabrication, and characterization of an RF/microwave system, including the antenna, RF front-end, baseband, mix-signal circuits, and digital signal processing models. 
EEC 134B
RF/Microwave Systems Design
EEC 134A.Limited to 24 students.
Board-level RF design, fabrication, and characterization of an RF/microwave system, including the antenna, RF front-end, baseband, mix-signal circuits, and digital signal processing models. 
EEC 135
Optoelectronics for High-Speed Data Networking & Computing Systems
EEC 130B.
Principles of optical communication systems. Planar dielectric waveguides. Optical fibers. Silicon photonics. Attenuation and dispersion in optical fibers. Optical sources, detectors, transmitters, receivers, modulators, optical amplifiers, and optical multiplexers/demultiplexers. Optics in data centers and computing systems. Design of digital optical communication links.
EEC 136A
Electronic Design Project
(ECS 036B or ECS 030 or ECS 034 or EEC 007);  EEC 100;  (EEC 018 or EEC 180A);  (EEC 110B or EEC 157A (can be concurrent) or EEC 180 or EEC 180B).Pass One restricted to major.
Optical, electronic and communication-engineering design of an opto-electronic system operating under performance and economic constraints. Measurement techniques will be designed and implemented, and the system will be characterized.
EEC 136B
Electronic Design Project
EEC 136A.
Optical, electronic and communication-engineering design of an opto-electronic system operating under performance and economic constraints. Measurement techniques will be designed and implemented, and the system will be characterized.
EEC 140A
Principles of Device Physics I
ENG 017 (can be concurrent);  (PHY 009D or PHY 009HE).
Semiconductor device fundamentals, equilibrium and non-equilibrium statistical mechanics, conductivity, diffusion, electrons and holes, p-n and Schottky junctions, first-order metal-oxide-semiconductor (MOS) field effect transistors, bipolar junction transistor fundamentals.
EEC 140B
Principles of Device Physics II
EEC 140A.
Electrical properties, designs, models and advanced concepts for MOS, Bipolar, and Junction Field-Effect Transistors, including scaling, minority-carrier distributions, non-ideal effects, and device fabrication methods. MESFET and heterojunction bipolar transistors (HBTs). Fundamentals of solar cells, photodetectors, LEDs and semiconductor lasers.
EEC 145
Electronic Materials
EEC 140A.
Electronic and physical properties of materials used in electronics, ICs, optoelectronics and MEMS.  Semiconductors, dielectrics, metals, optical materials, organic semiconductive, optical and nonlinear properties, as well as their synthesis and deposition methods.
EEC 146A
Integrated Circuits Fabrication
EEC 140A.
Theoretical and experimental study of basic fabrication processes for metal oxide semiconductor integrated circuits, including oxidation, photolithography, impurity diffusion, metallization, wet chemical etching, and characterization. 
EEC 146B
Advanced Integrated Circuits Fabrication
EEC 146A.Restricted to Electrical, Computer, and Electrical/Materials Science majors and Electrical Engineering graduate students; non-majors accommodated when space available. 
Fabrication processes for CMOS VLSI. Laboratory projects examine deposition of thin films, ion implantation, process simulation, anisotropic plasma etching, sputter metallization, and C-V analysis. Topics include isolation, projection alignment, epilayer growth, thin gate oxidation, and rapid thermal annealing.
EEC 150A
Introduction to Signals & Systems I
EEC 100;  (ENG 006 (can be concurrent) or MAT 022AL (can be concurrent)).
Characterization and analysis of continuous-time linear systems. Fourier series and transforms with applications. Introduction to communication systems. Transfer functions and block diagrams. Elements of feedback systems. Stability of linear systems.  
EEC 150B
Introduction to Signals & Systems II
EEC 150A.
Characterization and analysis of discrete time systems. Difference equation models. Ztransform analysis methods. Discrete and fast Fourier transforms. Introduction to digital filter design.
EEC 152
Digital Signal Processing 
EEC 150B;  (EEC 070 or ECS 050).
Theory and practice of real-time digital signal processing.  Fundamentals of real-time systems.  Programmable architectures including I/O, memory, peripherals, interrupts, DMA.  Interfacing issues with A/D and D/A converters to a programmable DSP.  Specification driven design and implementation of simple DSP applications.
EEC 157A
Control Systems
EEC 100.
Analysis and design of feedback control systems. Examples are drawn from electrical and mechanical systems as well as other engineering fields. Mathematical modeling of systems, stability criteria, root-locus and frequency domain design methods.
EEC 157B
Control Systems
EEC 157A.
Control system design; transfer-function and state-space methods; sampled-data implementation, digital control. Laboratory includes feedback system experiments and simulation studies.
EEC 160
Signal Analysis & Communications
EEC 150A.
Signal analysis based on Fourier methods. Fourier series and transforms; time-sampling, convolution, and filtering; spectral density; modulation: carrier-amplitude, carrier-frequency, and pulse-amplitude.
EEC 161
Probabilistic Analysis of Electrical & Computer Systems
EEC 100;  (ENG 006 or MAT 022AL).
Probabilistic and statistical analysis of electrical and computer systems. Discrete and continuous random variables, expectation and moments. Transformation of random variables. Joint and conditional densities. Limit theorems and statistics. Noise models, system reliability and testing.
EEC 165
Statistical & Digital Communication
EEC 160;  EEC 161.
Introduction to random process models of modulated signals and noise, and analysis of receiver performance. Analog and digitally modulated signals. Signal-to-noise ratio, probability of error, matched filters. Intersymbol interference, pulse shaping and equalization. Carrier and clock synchronization.
EEC 170
Introduction to Computer Architecture
(ECS 036B or ECS 030 or ECS 034 or EEC 007);  (EEC 018 or EEC 180A).
Introduces basic aspects of computer architecture, including computer performance measurement, instruction set design, computer arithmetic, pipelined/non-pipelined implementation, and memory hierarchies (cache and virtual memory). Presents a simplified Reduced Instruction Set Computer using logic design methods from the prerequisite course. 
EEC 171
Parallel Computer Architecture
EEC 170 or ECS 154B.
Organization and design of parallel processors including shared-memory multiprocessors, cache coherence, memory consistency, snooping protocols, synchronization, scalable multiprocessors, message passing protocols, distributed shared memory and interconnection networks.
EEC 172
Embedded Systems 
(EEC 170 or ECS 154A);  EEC 100.
Introduction to embedded-system hardware and software. Topics include: embedded processor and memory architecture; input/output hardware and software, including interrupts and direct memory access; interfacing with sensors and actuators; wired and wireless embedded networking.
EEC 173A
Computer Networks
(ECS 060 or ECS 032B or ECS 036C);  (ECS 132 or EEC 161 or MAT 135A or STA 131A or STA 120 or STA 032).Pass One open to Computer Science, Computer Science Engineering and Computer Engineering Majors only.
Overview of computer networks, TCP/IP protocol suite, computer-networking applications and protocols, transport-layer protocols, network architectures, Internet Protocol (IP), routing, link-layer protocols, local area and wireless networks, medium access control, physical aspects of data transmission, and network-performance analysis. 
EEC 173B
Design Projects in Communication Networks
EEC 173A or ECS 152A.
Advanced topics and design projects in communication networks.  Example topics include wireless networks, multimedia networking, network design and management, traffic analysis and modeling, network simulations and performance analysis. Offered in alternate years.
EEC 173B
Advanced Topics in Computer Networks
EEC 173A or ECS 152A.
Advanced topics in computer networks, wireless networks, multimedia networking, traffic analysis and modeling, network design and management, network simulation and performance analysis, and design projects in communication networks. 
EEC 180
Digital Systems II
EEC 018 or EEC 180A.
Computer-aided design of digital systems with emphasis on hardware description languages (VHDL), logic synthesis, and field-programmable gate arrays (FPGA). May cover advanced topics in digital system design such as static timing analysis, pipelining, memory system design, testing digital circuits.  
EEC 181A
Digital Systems Design Project
(EEC 180 or EEC 180B);  EEC 170.
Digital-system and computer-engineering design course involving architecture, design, implementation and testing of a prototype application-specific processor under given design constraints. Team project includes a final presentation and report.
EEC 181B
Digital Systems Design Project
EEC 181A.
Digital-system and computer-engineering design course involving architecture, design, implementation and testing of a prototype application-specific processor under given design constraints. Team project includes a final presentation and report.
EEC 183
Testing & Verification of Digital Systems
EEC 170;  EEC 180B.
Computer aided-testing and design verification techniques for digital systems; physical fault testing; simulation-based design verification; formal verification; timing analysis.
EEC 189A
Special Topics in Electrical Engineering & Computer Science: Computer Science
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Computer Science.
EEC 189B
Special Topics in Electrical Engineering & Computer Science: Programming Systems
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Programming Systems.
EEC 189C
Special Topics in Electrical Engineering & Computer Science: Digital Systems
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Digital Systems.
EEC 189D
Special Topics in Electrical Engineering & Computer Science: Communications
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Communications.
EEC 189E
Special Topics in Electrical Engineering & Computer Science: Signal Transmission
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Signal Transmission.
EEC 189F
Special Topics in Electrical Engineering & Computer Science: Digital Communication
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Digital Communication.
EEC 189G
Special Topics in Electrical Engineering & Computer Science: Control Systems
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Control Systems.
EEC 189H
Special Topics in Electrical Engineering & Computer Science: Robotics
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Robotics.
EEC 189I
Special Topics in Electrical Engineering & Computer Science: Signal Processing
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Signal Processing.
EEC 189J
Special Topics in Electrical Engineering & Computer Science: Image Processing
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Image Processing.
EEC 189K
Special Topics in Electrical Engineering & Computer Science: High-Frequency Phenomena & Devices
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in High-Frequency Phenomena & Devices.
EEC 189L
Special Topics in Electrical Engineering & Computer Science: Solid-State Devices & Physical Electronics
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Solid-State Devices & Physical Electronics.
EEC 189M
Special Topics in Electrical Engineering & Computer Science: Systems Theory
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Systems Theory.
EEC 189N
Special Topics in Electrical Engineering & Computer Science: Active & Passive Circuits
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Active & Passive Circuits.
EEC 189O
Special Topics in Electrical Engineering & Computer Science: Integrated Circuits
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Integrated Circuits.
EEC 189P
Special Topics in Electrical Engineering & Computer Science: Computer Software
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Computer Software.
EEC 189Q
Special Topics in Electrical Engineering & Computer Science: Computer Engineering
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Computer Engineering.
EEC 189R
Special Topics in Electrical Engineering & Computer Science: Microprocessing
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Microprocessing.
EEC 189S
Special Topics in Electrical Engineering & Computer Science: Electronics
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Electronics.
EEC 189T
Special Topics in Electrical Engineering & Computer Science: Electromagnetics 
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Electromagnetics.
EEC 189U
Special Topics in Electrical Engineering & Computer Science: Opto-Electronics
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Opto-Electronics.
EEC 189W
Special Topics in Electrical Engineering & Computer Science: Computer Networks
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Computer Networks.
EEC 190C
Research Group Conferences in Electrical & Computer Engineering
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing in Electrical and Computer Engineering.
Research group conferences. 
EEC 192
Internship in Electrical & Computer Engineering
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of a minimum of 84 units; project approval before period of internship.
Supervised work experience in electrical and computer engineering.  
EEC 193A
Senior Design Project
EEC 196 (can be concurrent);  and Consent of Instructor.Restricted to senior standing in Electrical or Computer Engineering.
Team design project for seniors in Electrical or Computer Engineering. Project involves analysis, design, implementation and evaluation of an Electrical Engineering or Computer Engineering system. Project is supervised by a faculty member.
EEC 193B
Senior Design Project
EEC 193A.
Team design project for seniors in Electrical Engineering or Computer Engineering. Project involves analysis, design, implementation and evaluation of an Electrical Engineering or Computer Engineering system. Project supervised by a faculty member.
EEC 195A
Autonomous Vehicle Design Project 
(ECS 030 or ECS 036B or ECS 034 or EEC 007);  (EEC 018 or EEC 180A);  (EEC 110B or EEC 157A (can be concurrent) or ECS 060 or (EEC 180B or EEC 180)).Pass One restricted to major.
Design and construct an autonomous race car. Work in groups to design, build and test speed control circuits, track sensing circuits, and a steering control loop.  
EEC 195B
Autonomous Vehicle Design Project
EEC 195A.
Design and construct an autonomous race car. Students work in groups to design, build and test speed control circuits, track sensing circuits, and a steering control loop.
EEC 196
Issues in Engineering Design
Senior standing in Electrical or Computer Engineering.
Covers various electrical and computer engineering standards and realistic design constraints including economic, manufacturability, sustainability, ethical, health & safety, environmental, social, and political.
EEC 197T
Tutoring in Electrical & Computer Engineering
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Tutoring in Electrical & Computer Engineering courses, especially introductory circuits. For upper division undergraduate students who will provide tutorial assistance.
EEC 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

EEC 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

EEC 201
Digital Signal Processing
EEC 150B;  STA 120 or MAT 131 or MAT 167 recommended.
Theory and design of digital filters. Classification of digital filters, linear phase systems, all-pass functions, FIR and IIR filter design methods and optimality measures, numerically robust structures for digital filters.
EEC 205
Computational Methods in Biomedical Imaging
(BIM 105 or STA 120);  (BIM 108 or EEC 150A).
Analytic tomographic reconstruction from projections in 2D and 3D; model-based image reconstruction methods; maximum likelihood and Bayesian methods; applications to CT, PET, and SPECT.
EEC 206
Digital Image Processing
EEC 150B.
Two-dimensional systems theory, image perception, sampling and quantization, transform theory and applications, enhancement, filteringand restoration, image analysis, and image processing systems.
EEC 210
MOS Analog Circuit Design
EEC 110B;  EEC 140A.
Analysis and design of MOS amplifiers, bias circuits, voltage references and other analog circuits. Stability and compensation of feedback amplifiers. Introduction to noise analysis in MOS circuits.
EEC 210
MOS Analog Circuit Design
EEC 110B;  EEC 140A.
Analysis and design of MOS amplifiers, bias circuits, voltage references and other analog circuits. Stability and compensation of feedback amplifiers. Introduction to noise analysis in MOS circuits.
EEC 211
Advanced Analog Circuit Design
EEC 210;  STA 131A and EEC 112 recommended.
Noise and distortion in electronic circuits and systems. Application to communication circuits. Specific applications include mixers, low-noise amplifiers, power amplifiers, phase-locked loops, oscillators and receiver architectures.
EEC 212
Analog MOS IC Design for Signal Processing
EEC 210.
Analysis and design of analog MOS integrated circuits. Passive components, single-ended and fully differential op amps, sampled-data and continuous-time filters.
EEC 212
Analog MOS IC Design for Signal Processing
EEC 210.
Analysis and design of analog MOS integrated circuits. Passive components, Single-ended and fully differential op amps, Sampled-data and continuous-time filters.
EEC 213
Data-Conversion Techniques & Circuits
EEC 210.
Digital-to-analog and analog-to-digital conversion; component characteristics and matching; sample-and-hold, comparator, amplifier, and reference circuits.
EEC 213
Data-Conversion Techniques & Circuits
EEC 210.
Digital-to-analog and analog-to-digital conversion; component characteristics and matching; sample-and-hold, comparator, amplifier, and reference circuits.
EEC 215
Circuits for Digital Communications
EEC 150B;  EEC 210 (can be concurrent);  EEC 165, EEC 166, or EEC 265 recommended.
Analog, digital, and mixed-signal CMOS implementations of communication-circuit blocks: gain control, adaptive equalizers, sampling detectors, clock recovery.
EEC 216
Low Power Digital Integrated Circuit Design
EEC 118.
IC design for low power and energy consumption.  Low power architectures, logic styles and circuit design.  Variable supply and threshold voltages.  Leakage management. Power estimation.  Energy sources, power electronics, and energy recovery.  Applications in portable electronics and sensors.  Thermodynamic limits.
EEC 216
Low Power Digital Integrated Circuit Design
EEC 118.
Integrated circuit design for low power and energy consumption. Low power architectures, logic styles and circuit design. Variable supply and threshold voltages. Leakage management. Power estimation. Energy sources, power electronics, and energy recovery. Applications in portable electronics and sensors. Thermodynamic limits.
EEC 221
Analog Filter Design
EEC 100;  EEC 150A.
Design of active and passive filters including filter specification and approximation theory. Passive LC filter design will cover doubly-terminated reactance two-port synthesis. Active filter design will include sensitivity, op-amp building blocks, cascade, multi-loop, ladder and active-R filter design.
EEC 221
Radio Frequency & Microwave Filter Design
EEC 132A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Design of radio frequency and microwave filters including filter specification and approximation theory. Passive LC filter design covers doubly-terminated reactance two-port synthesis and coupling matrix based synthesis. Active filter design includes sensitivity, op-amp building blocks, and cascade filter design.
EEC 222
RF IC Design
EEC 132C;  EEC 210.
Radio frequency (RF) solid-state devices, RF device modeling and design rules; non-linear RF circuit design techniques; use of non-linear computer-aided (CAD) tools; RF power amplifier design.
EEC 222
RF IC Design
EEC 210.
Radio frequency (RF) solid-state devices, RF device modeling and design rules; non-linear RF circuit design techniques; use of non-linear computer-aided (CAD) tools; RF power amplifier design.
EEC 223
RF Integrated Circuits for Wireless Communications
EEC 132A;  EEC 112.
Integrated RF front end circuit design of receivers and synthesizers for wireless communications, such as LNA, mixers, PLL; noise and linearity analysis and specifications; theory and working mechanism of synthesizers and phase noise analysis.
EEC 224
Terahertz & mm-Wave Integrated Circuit Design
EEC 132A;  EEC 112;  or Consent of Instructor.
Fundamental theory of RF transmitter and receiver, including noise analysis, transceiver architectures, and antenna arrays. Fundamental limitations, theory and design of amplifiers, oscillators and signal sources at THz and mm-wave frequencies
EEC 228
Advanced Microwave Circuit & Device Design Techniques
EEC 132B.
Theory, design, fabrication, analysis of advanced microwave circuits and devices. Wideband transformers, stripline/microstripline broadband couplers. Lumped and distributed filter synthesis. Broadband matching theory applied to microwave devices. Wideband and low noise FET/HEMT amplifiers. Advanced microwave oscillator theory. Phase noise analysis.
EEC 229
RF-MEMS & Adaptive Wireless Frontends 
EEC 130A.
Focuses on the modeling, design, fabrication, and characterization of RF-MEMS while providing a thorough introduction to the technology with an emphasis on how it will benefit the design of adaptive RF/microwave wireless systems. 
EEC 230
Electromagnetics
EEC 130B.
Maxwell's equations, plane waves, reflection and refraction, complex waves, waveguides, resonant cavities, and basic antennas.
EEC 230
Electromagnetics
EEC 130B.
Maxwell's equations, plane waves, reflection and refraction, complex waves, waveguides, resonant cavities, and basic antennas.
EEC 231A
Plasma Physics & Controlled Fusion
Consent of Instructor.
Equilibrium plasma properties; single particle motion; fluid equations; waves and instabilities in a fluid plasma; plasma kinetic theory and transport coefficients; linear and nonlinear Vlasov theory; fluctuations, correlations and radiation; inertial and magnetic confinement systems in controlled fusion.
EEC 231B
Plasma Physics & Controlled Fusion
EEC 231A;  and Consent of Instructor.
Equilibrium plasma properties; single particle motion; fluid equations; waves and instabilities in a fluid plasma; plasma kinetic theory and transport coefficients; linear and nonlinear Vlasov theory; fluctuations, correlations and radiation; inertial and magnetic confinement systems in controlled fusion.
EEC 231B
Plasma Physics & Controlled Fusion II
EEC 231A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Equilibrium plasma properties; single particle motion; fluid equations; waves & instabilities in a fluid plasma; plasma kinetic theory & transport coefficients; linear & nonlinear Vlasov theory; fluctuations, correlations & radiation; inertial & magnetic confinement systems in controlled fusion.
EEC 231C
Plasma Physics & Controlled Fusion
EEC 231B;  and Consent of Instructor.
Equilibrium plasma properties; single particle motion; fluid equations; waves and instabilities in a fluid plasma; plasma kinetic theory and transport coefficients; linear and nonlinear Vlasov theory; fluctuations, correlations and radiation; inertial and magnetic confinement systems in controlled fusion.
EEC 231C
Plasma Physics & Controlled Fusion III
EEC 231B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Equilibrium plasma properties; single particle motion; fluid equations; waves & instabilities in a fluid plasma; plasma kinetic theory & transport coefficients; linear & nonlinear Vlasov theory; fluctuations, correlations & radiation; inertial & magnetic confinement systems in controlled fusion.
EEC 232A
Advanced Applied Electromagnetics I
EEC 132B.
The exact formulation of applied electromagnetic problems using Green's functions.  Applications of these techniques to transmission circuits.
EEC 232A
Advanced Applied Electromagnetics I
EEC 132B or EEC 230.
The exact formulation of applied electromagnetic problems using Green's functions. Applications of these techniques to transmission circuits.
EEC 232B
Advanced Applied Electromagnetics II
EEC 132B.
An advanced treatment of electromagnetics with applications to passive microwave devices and antennas.
EEC 233
High Speed Signal Integrity
EEC 130B.
Design and analysis of interconnects in high-speed circuits and sub-systems; understanding of high-speed signal propagation and signal integrity concepts; electromagnetic modeling tools and experimental techniques.
EEC 233
High Speed Signal Integrity
EEC 130B.
Design and analysis of interconnects in high-speed circuits and sub-systems; understanding of high-speed signal propagation and signal integrity concepts; electromagnetic modeling tools and experimental techniques.
EEC 234A
Physics & Technology of Microwave Vacuum Electron Beam Devices I
B.S. degree in physics or electrical engineering or the equivalent background.
Physics and technology of electron beam emissions, flow and transport, electron gun design, space charge waves and klystrons.
EEC 234A
Physics & Technology of Microwave Vacuum Electron Beam Devices I
B.S. degree in physics or engineering or the equivalent background or consent of instructor.
Physics & technology of electron beam emission, flow and transport, electron gun design, space charge waves & klystrons with applications to accelerator systems, RF power sources for radar & communication systems, thermionic energy conversion, and electric space propulsion. Recent advances in materials & manufacturing technologies are also reviewed.
EEC 234B
Physics & Technology of Microwave Vacuum Electron Beam Devices II
EEC 234A.
Theory and experimental design of traveling wave tubes, backward wave oscillators, and extended interaction oscillators.
EEC 234B
Physics & Technology of Microwave Vacuum Electron Beam Devices II
EEC 234A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Theory, modeling, & experimental design of traveling wave tubes, backward wave oscillators, and extended interaction oscillators employed in satellite commutations, plasma imaging, and underground imaging systems.
EEC 234C
Physics & Technology of Microwave Vacuum Electron Beam Devices III
EEC 234B.
Physics and technology of gyrotrons, gyro-amplifiers, free electron lasers, magnetrons, crossfield amplifiers and relativistic devices.
EEC 234C
Physics & Technology of Microwave Vacuum Electron Beam Devices III
EEC 234B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Physics & technology of gyrotrons, gyro-amplifiers, free electron lasers, magnetrons, cross-field amplifiers, and relativistic devices employed in plasma fusion reactors, microwave heating, and high power microwave applications.
EEC 235
Photonics
EEC 230 (can be concurrent).
Optical propagation of electromagnetic waves and beams in photonic components and the design of such devices using numerical techniques.
EEC 235
Photonics
EEC 130B;  EEC 230 recommended.
Optical propagation of electromagnetic waves and beams in photonic components and the design of such devices using numerical techniques.
EEC 236
Nonlinear Optical Applications
EEC 130B;  EEC 230 (can be concurrent).
Nonlinear optical interactions in optical communication, optical information processing and integrated optics.  Basic concepts underlying optical nonlinear interactions in materials and guided media.
EEC 237A
Lasers
EEC 235;  EEC 130B;  Or the equivalent of EEC 130B.
Theoretical and practical description of lasers. Theory of population inversion, amplification and oscillation using semiclassical oscillator model and rate equations. Description and design of real laser system. 
EEC 237B
Laser Physics II
EEC 237A or EAD 265A.
Oscillation threshold. Coupled cavity/atomic rate equations, Linear pulse propagation; dispersion, broadening, compression. Nonlinear pulse propagation. Energy extraction. Optical beams, resonators, eigenmodes, axial/transverse modes. Paraxial ray optics, resonator stability, ABCD matrices. Laser dynamics; transients, spiking, Q-switching, active and passive modelocking.
EEC 238
Semiconductor Diode Lasers
EEC 245A.
Understanding of fundamental optical transitions in semiconductor and quantum-confined systems are applied to diode lasers and selected photonic devices. The importance of radiative and non-radiativerecombination, simulated emission, excitons in quantum wells, and strained quantum layers are considered.
EEC 238
Semiconductor Lasers & Photonic Integration
EEC 140A.
Understanding of fundamental optical transitions in semiconductors and quantum-confined systems are applied to diode & unipolar lasers and selected photonic devices. The importance of radiative and non-radiative recombination, simulated emission, excitons in quantum wells, and strained quantum layers are considered. Photonic integrated circuits based on active (with optical gain) and passive (without optical gain).  
EEC 239A
Optical Communication Technologies  for High-Speed Data Networking
EEC 130B.
Enabling technologies for optical fiber communication and data center networks. Physical layer issues for component and system technologies in high-speed data optical communications. High-capacity data multiplexing technologies including wavelength-division-multiplexing, time-division-multiplexing, and advanced coherent modulation. Optical signal transmission, optical amplification, and optical switching for telecom and data center networks.
EEC 239B
Optical Fiber Communications Systems and Networking
EEC 239A.
Physical layer optical communications systems in network architectures and protocols.  Optical systems design and integration using optical component technologies.  Comparison of wavelength routed WDM, TDM, and NGI systems and networks.  Case studies of next generation technologies. 
EEC 239B
High-Capacity Optical Data Systems & Networks 
EEC 239A.
High-capacity optical data systems and networks, built-on modern optical communication technologies. Technologies behind data center networking, software defined networking, and RF-optical networking. Physical layer issues in light of networking architectures and protocols. Optical communications systems design and integration. Systems technologies and higher-level network architecture, case studies. WDM, TDM, and EON networking, optical and wireless access technologies based on PON and ROF. 
EEC 240
Semiconductor Device Physics
EEC 140B.
Physical principles, characteristics and models of fundamental semiconductor device types, including P-N and Schottky diodes, MOSFETs and MESFETs Bipolar Junction Transistors, and light emitters/detectors.
EEC 241
Introduction to Molecular Electronics
Consent of Instructor.
Examines molecules for electronic devices and sensors. Covers: electronic states of molecules, charge transport in nanoscale systems, and fabrication and measurement of molecular-scale devices. Specific Topics: Hartree-Fock & Density Functional Theory, Landauer formalism, coulomb blockade, tunneling and hopping transport.
EEC 242
Advanced Nanostructured Devices
EEC 130A;  EEC 140A.
Physics of nano-structured materials and device operation.  Overview of new devices enabled by nanotechnology; fabrication and characterization methods; applications of nano-structures and devices.
EEC 244A
Design of Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS) 
EEC 140A;  EEC 140B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Theory and practice of MEMS design. Micromechanical fundamentals, CAD tools, and case studies. A MEMS design project is required. Designs will be fabricated in a commercial foundry and tested in EEC 244B.
EEC 245
Micro- & Nano-Technology in Life Sciences
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Survey of biodevice design from engineering and biological perspectives; micro-/nano-fabrication techniques; surface science and mass transport; essential biological processes and models; proposal development skills on merging aforementioned themes.
EEC 246
Advanced Projects in IC Fabrication
EEC 146B.
Individualized projects in the fabrication of analog or digital integrated circuits.
EEC 247
Advanced Semiconductor Devices
Graduate standing in Engineering.
Semiconductor devices, including MOSFETs, heterojunction transistors, light-emitting diodes, lasers, sensors, detectors, power and high-voltage transistors, MEMS resonators, organic semiconductors and photovoltaics. All material is from recent literature, encouraging students to utilize search methods and critically assess the latest research. 
EEC 248
Photovoltaics & Solar Cells
EEC 140B;  or Consent of Instructor.  Or equivalent.
Physics and application of photovoltaics and solar cells, including design, fabrication technology, and grid incorporation. Mono and microcrystalline silicon devices; thin-film technologies, heterojunction and organic-semiconductor technologies. Collectors, electrical inverters and infrastructure issues. Challenges and concerns.
EEC 249
Nanofabrication
Graduate standing in Engineering.
Theory and practices of nanofabrication used for producing ICs, electronic devices, optoelectronics, sensors, and microstructures. Major topics include electron-, photon-, and ion-beams and their interactions with solids, chemical vapor depositions, plasma processing and micromachining.
EEC 249
Nanofabrication
Graduate standing in Engineering.
Theory and practice of nanofabrication (top-down and bottom-up approaches), used for producing integrated circuits, electronic devices, sensors, and microstructures. Process development and characterization.
EEC 250
Linear Systems & Signals
EEC 150A.
Mathematical description of systems. Selected topics in linear algebra. Solution of the state equations and an analysis of stability, controllability, observability, realizations, state feedback and state estimation. Discrete-time signals and systems, and the Z-transform.
EEC 251
Nonlinear Systems
EEC 250.
Nonlinear differential equations, second-order systems, approximation methods, Lyapunov stability, absolute stability, Popov criterion, circle criterion, feedback linearization techniques.
EEC 251
Nonlinear Systems
EEC 250.
Nonlinear differential equations, second-order systems, approximation methods, bifurcations, Lyapunov stability, absolute stability, Popov criterion, circle criterion, sliding-mode control, feedback linearization techniques.
EEC 252
Multivariable Control System Design
EEC 250.
Modern control system design, theory, and techniques.  Topics will include single-loop feedback design; stability, performance and robustness of multivariable control systems; LQG design; H-infinity design; frequency response methods; and optimization-based design.
EEC 252
Multivariable Control System Design
EEC 250.
Review of single-loop feedback design. Stability, performance and robustness of multi-input multi-output control systems. H-infinity design. Frequency response methods. Optimization-based design. Algebraic design methods for uncertain systems.
EEC 254
Optimization
MAT 022A;  Knowledge of FORTRAN or C.
Modeling optimization problems in engineering design and other applications; optimality conditions; unconstrained optimization (gradient, Newton, conjugate gradient and quasi-Newton methods); duality and Lagrangian relaxation constrained optimization. (Primal method and an introduction to penalty and augmented Lagrangian methods.)
EEC 256
Stochastic Optimization in Dynamic Systems
EEC 260;  Or the equivalent.
Markov Decision Processes (MDP), dynamic programming, multi-armed bandit, Partially observable MDP, optimal stopping, stochastic scheduling, sequential detection and quickest change detection, competitive MDP and game theory, applications in dynamic systems such as queueing networks, communication systems, and multi-agent systems.
EEC 260
Random Signals & Noise
STA 120;  EEC 150A;  EEC 250 recommended.
Random processes as probabilistic models for signals and noise. Review of probability, random variables, and expectation. Study of correlation function and spectral density, ergodicity and duality between time averages and expected values, filters and dynamical systems. Applications.
EEC 260
Random Signals & Noise
EEC 150A;  EEC 161.
Random processes as probabilistic models for signals and noise. Probability and random variables, Convergence and limit theorems, Specification of random processes, Markov Chains, Wiener process and white Gaussian noise, Poisson process and shot noise, Processing and frequency analysis of random signals.
EEC 261
Signal Processing for Communications
EEC 165;  EEC 260;  or Consent of Instructor.
Signal processing in wireless and wireline communication systems. Characterization and distortion of wireless and wireline channels. Channel equalization and maximum likelihood sequence estimation. Channel precoding and pre-equalization. OFDM and transmit diversity. Array processing. 
EEC 262
Multi-access Communications Theory
(EEC 173A or ECS 152A);  STA 120;  Or equivalent of STA 120.
Maximum stable throughput of Poisson collision channels.  Classic collision resolution algorithms.  Carrier sensing multiple access and its performance analysis.  System stability analysis.  Joint design of the physical/medium access control layers.  Capacity region of multi-access channels. Multi-access with correlated sources.  
EEC 263
Optimal & Adaptive Filtering
EEC 260.
Geometric formulation of least-squares estimation problems. Theory and applications of optimum Wiener and Kalman filtering. MAP and maximum likelihood estimation of hidden Markov models, Viterbi algorithm. Adaptive filtering algorithms, properties and applications. 
EEC 264
Estimation & Detection of Signals in Noise
EEC 260.
Introduction to parameter estimation and detections of signals in noise. Bayes and Neyman-Pearson likelihood-ratio tests for signal detection. Maximum-likelihood parameter estimation. Detection of known and Gaussian signals in white or colored noise.  Applications to communications, radar, signal processing.
EEC 265
Principles of Digital Communications
EEC 165;  EEC 260;  or Consent of Instructor.
Introduction to digital communications. Coding for analog sources. Characterization of signals and systems. Modulation and demodulation for the additive Gaussian channel. Digital signaling over bandwidth-constrained linear filter channels and over fading multipath channels. Spread spectrum signals.
EEC 266
Information Theory & Coding
STA 120.
Information theory and coding. Measure of information. Redundancy reduction encoding of an information source. Capacity of a communication channel, errorfree communications.
EEC 266
Information Theory & Coding
EEC 161.
Topics include Entropy, Relatively Entropy, Mutual Information; Asymptotic Equipartition Property; Entropy Rates of Stochastic Process; Data Compression; Channel Capacity; Differential Entropy; Gaussian Channel; Rate Distortion Theory; Network Information Theory.
EEC 267
Mobile Communications
EEC 260;  EEC 265 (can be concurrent).
Time-varying multi-path fading channel models and receiver performance in fading channels;  multiple access techniques and multiple access receivers design and performance;  optimum design and the capacity of wireless channels.
EEC 269A
Error Correcting Codes I
MAT 022A;  EEC 160.
Introduction to the theory and practice of block codes, linear block codes, cyclic codes, decoding algorithms, coding techniques. 
EEC 269B
Error Correcting Codes II
EEC 165;  EEC 269A.
Introduction to convolutional codes, turbo codes, trellis and block coded modulation codes,soft-decision decoding algorithms, the Viterbi algorithm,reliability-based decoding, trellis-based decoding, multistage decoding.
EEC 270
Computer Architecture
EEC 170 or ECS 154B.
Introduction to modern techniques for high-performance single andmultiple processor systems. Topics include advanced pipeline design, advanced memory hierarchy design, optimizing pipeline and memory use, and memory sharing among multiprocessors. Case studies of recent single and multiple processor systems.
EEC 272
High-Performance Computer Architecture
EEC 270 or ECS 201A.
Designing and analysis of high performance computer architecture with emphasis on vector processing, on-chip interconnect networks, chip-level multiprocessors, memory and storage subsystem design and impact of technological advances on computer architecture.
EEC 273
Networking Architecture & Resource Management
ECS 152A or EEC 173A.Pass One and Pass Two open to Graduate Students in Computer Science and Electrical and Computer Engineering only.
Concepts and design principles of computer networks. Network architectures, protocol mechanisms and implementation principles (transport/network/data-link layers), network algorithms, router mechanisms, design requirements of applications, network simulation, modeling and performance analysis.
EEC 274
Internet Measurements, Modeling & Analysis
ECS 252 or EEC 273.
Advanced topics in the theoretical foundations of network measurements, modeling, and statistical inferencing. Applications to Internet engineering, routing optimization, load balancing, traffic engineering, fault tolerance, anomaly detection, and network security. Individual project requirement.
EEC 274
Internet Measurements & Network Interference
EEC 173A or ECS 152A.
Internet measurements and network inference, covering the entire data pipeline from data collection, analysis, modeling, to design of data-driven novel/intelligent networked systems. Operational networks: Internet backbone, cellular networks, edge networks, software-defined networks and network function virtualization, data center networks, cloud infrastructure, peer-to-peer and content distribution networks, online social networks, and networked Internet-of-things (IoTs).
EEC 276
Fault-Tolerant Computer Systems: Design & Analysis
EEC 170;  (EEC 018 or EEC 180A).
Introduces fault-tolerant digital system theory and practice. Covers recent and classic fault-tolerant techniques based on hardware redundancy, time redundancy, information redundancy, and software redundancy. Examines hardware and software reliability analysis, and example fault-tolerant designs.
EEC 276
Fault-Tolerant Computer Systems: Design & Analysis
EEC 170;  EEC 018.
Introduces fault-tolerant digital system theory and practice. Covers recent and classic fault-tolerant techniques based on hardware redundancy, time redundancy, information redundancy, and software redundancy. Examines hardware and software reliability analysis, and example fault-tolerant designs. 
EEC 277
Graphics Architecture
(ECS 154B or EEC 170);  ECS 175.
Design and analysis of the architecture of computer graphics systems.  Topics include the graphics pipeline with a concentration on hardware technqiues and algorithms, exploiting parallelism in graphics, and case studies of noteworthy and modern graphics arhitectures.  
EEC 279
Modern Parallel Computing
ECS 036B or ECS 034;  optional but desirable: EEC 170 or ECS 154A.
Exploration of the architecture of modern parallel computers, their programming models, and their programming systems.
EEC 279
Modern Parallel Computing
ECS 036B or ECS 034;  EEC 170 or ECS 154A recommended.
Exploration of the architecture of modern parallel computers, their programming models, and their programming systems.
EEC 281
VLSI Digital Signal Processing
EEC 150B;  EEC 170;  (EEC 180 or EEC 180B);  or Consent of Instructor.
Digital signal processors, building blocks, and algorithms. Design and implementation of processor algorithms, architectures, control, functional units, and circuit topologies for increased performance and reduced circuit size and power dissipation.
EEC 283
Advanced Design Verification of Digital Systems
EEC 170;  (EEC 018 or EEC 180A).
Design verification techniques for digital systems; simulation-based design verification techniques; formal verification techniques, including equivalence checking, model checking, and theorem proving; timing analysis and verification; application of design cerification techniques to microprocessors.
EEC 284
Design & Optimization of Embedded Computing Systems
EEC 170;  (EEC 180 or EEC 180B);  or Consent of Instructor.  ECS 122A recommended.
Introduction to design and optimization of digital computing systems for embedded applications. Topics include combinatorial optimization techniques, performance and energy optimization in embedded systems, compilation and architecture-specific mapping, programmable and reconfigurable platforms; design automation and algorithmic improvements to design process.
EEC 286
Introduction to Digital System Testing
(STA 120 or STA 131A);  (EEC 018 or EEC 180A).
Review of several current techniques used to diagnose faults in both combinational and sequential circuits. Topics include path sensitization procedures, Boolean difference, D-algorithm random test generation, TC testing and an analysis of the effects of intermittent faults. 
EEC 286
Introduction to Digital System Testing
EEC 018.
Review of several current techniques used to detect physical faults in both combinational and sequential circuits. Topics include fault modeling, fault simulation, test generation, compression techniques, and testing architectures. 
EEC 289A
Special Topics in Electrical & Computer Engineering: Computer Science
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Computer Science.
EEC 289B
Special Topics in Electrical & Computer Engineering: Programming Systems
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Programming Systems.
EEC 289C
Special Topics in Electrical & Computer Engineering: Digital Systems
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Digital Systems.
EEC 289D
Special Topics in Electrical & Computer Engineering: Digital Systems
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Digital Systems.
EEC 289E
Special Topics in Electrical & Computer Engineering: Signal Transmission
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Signal Transmission.
EEC 289F
Special Topics in Electrical & Computer Engineering: Digital Communication
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Digital Communication.
EEC 289G
Special Topics in Electrical & Computer Engineering: Control Systems
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Control Systems.
EEC 289H
Special Topics in Electrical & Computer Engineering: Robotics
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Robotics.
EEC 289I
Special Topics in Electrical & Computer Engineering: Signal Processing
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Signal Processing.
EEC 289J
Special Topics in Electrical & Computer Engineering: Image Processing
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Image Processing.
EEC 289K
Special Topics in Electrical & Computer Engineering: High Frequency Phenomena & Devices
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in High Frequency Phenomena & Devices.
EEC 289L
Special Topics in Electrical & Computer Engineering: Solid-State Devices & Physical Electronics
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Solid-State Devices & Physical Electronics.
EEC 289M
Special Topics in Electrical & Computer Engineering: Systems Theory
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Systems Theory.
EEC 289N
Special Topics in Electrical & Computer Engineering: Active & Passive Circuits
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Active & Passive Circuits.
EEC 289O
Special Topics in Electrical & Computer Engineering: Integrated Circuits
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Integrated Circuits.
EEC 289P
Special Topics in Electrical & Computer Engineering: Computer Software
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Computer Software.
EEC 289Q
Special Topics in Electrical & Computer Engineering: Computer Engineering
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Computer Engineering.
EEC 289R
Special Topics in Electrical & Computer Engineering: Microprocessing
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Microprocessing.
EEC 289S
Special Topics in Electrical & Computer Engineering: Electronics
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Electronics.
EEC 289T
Special Topics in Electrical & Computer Engineering: Electromagnetics
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Electromagnetics.
EEC 289U
Special Topics in Electrical & Computer Engineering: Optoelectronics
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Optoelectronics.
EEC 289W
Special Topics in Electrical Engineering & Computer Science: Computer Networks
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Computer Networks.
EEC 290C
Graduate Research Group Conference in Electrical & Computer Engineering
Consent of Instructor.
Research problems, progress, and techniques in electrical and computer engineering.
EEC 290P
Capstone Project For MS Plan II 
Consent of Instructor.
Conducting research projects in electrical and computer engineering. Communicating research results in written reports and oral presentations. Systemic project implementation to answer a comprehensive scientific or technical question in the area of electrical and computer engineering.
EEC 291
Solid-State Circuit Research Laboratory Seminar
Graduate standing.
Lectures on solid-state circuit and system design by various visiting experts in the field.
EEC 292
Seminar in Solid-State Technology
Graduate standing.
Lectures on solid-state technology by various visiting experts in the field.
EEC 293
Computer Engineering Research Seminar
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Lectures, tutorials and seminars on topics in computer engineering.
EEC 294
Communications, Signal & Image Processing Seminar
Graduate standing.
Communications, signal and image processing, video engineering and computer vision.
EEC 295
Systems, Control & Robotics Seminar
Graduate standing.
Seminars on current research in systems and control by faculty and visiting experts. Technical presentations and lectures on current topics in robotics research and robotics technology.
EEC 296
Photonics Research Seminar
Graduate standing.
Lectures on photonics and related areas by faculty and visiting experts.
EEC 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

EEC 390
The Teaching of Electrical Engineering
Meet qualifications for teaching assistant and/or associate-in in Electrical Engineering.
Participation as a teaching assistant or associate-in in a designated engineering course. Methods of leading discussion groups or laboratory sections, writing and grading quizzes, use of laboratory equipment, and grading laboratory reports.
EEC 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Graduate standing.

EGG 200
Energy Systems
ENG 105;  or equivalent.
Theory and application of energy systems. Systems analysis, energy conversion technologies, environmental considerations, economics and system optimization.
EGG 202
Energy & Climate Policy
ECN 100A or ARE 100A;  or Consent of Instructor.Pass One restricted to graduate students in Economics, Energy Graduate Group, and Transportation Technology & Policy Graduate Group.
Fundamentals of energy technology, economics, and policy. Survey and analysis of current and prospective climate policies at the local and global level, including but not limited to cap-and-trade, emissions offsets, intensity standards, technology standards, mandates and subsidies.
EGG 290
Energy Seminar
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Selected topics of current interest in energy. Topics vary and will be announced at the beginning of each quarter. Seminar speakers include invited speakers from outside the university as well as faculty. 
EGG 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.
Research
EME 005
Computer Programming for  Engineering Applications
MAT 016A (can be concurrent) or MAT 021A (can be concurrent).
Structured programming in C for solving problems in engineering. Introduction to MATLAB and comparison study of C/C++ with MATLAB. 
EME 050
Manufacturing Processes
ENG 004 C- or better;  PHY 009A C- or better.Restricted to Mechanical Engineering and Mechanical Engineering/Materials Science Engineering majors.
Modern manufacturing methods, safety, manufacturing instructions, computer-aided manufacturing and their role in the engineering design and development process.
EME 092
Internship in Mechanical Engineering
Lower division standing; approval of project prior to period of internship.
Supervised work-study experience in engineering.
EME 097TC
Mentoring & Tutoring Engineering in the Community
Consent of Instructor.
Mentoring, coaching, tutoring and/or supervision of students in K-12 schools in Engineering-related topics.
EME 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.

EME 106
Thermo-Fluid Dynamics
ENG 103 C- or better;  ENG 105 C- or better.Restricted to Mechanical Engineering, Aerospace Science & Engineering, and Mechanical Engineering/Materials Science Engineering majors.
Inviscid incompressible flow, compressible flow, ideal gas mixtures, psychrometrics, reacting mixtures and combustion.
EME 108
Measurement Systems
ENG 100 C- or better;  ENG 102 C- or better;  ENG 104 recommended.Restricted to Mechanical Engineering, Aerospace Science & Engineering and Mechanical/Materials Science & Engineering.
Experiments to illustrate principles of mechanical systems. Signal analysis; Demonstration of basic sensors for mechanical systems; Experimental project design; Experiments involving voltage measurement; strain gauges, dynamic systems of 1st order.  
EME 109
Experimental Methods for Thermal Fluids
EME 106 C- or better.Restricted to Mechanical Engineering, Aerospace Science & Engineering and Mechanical/Materials Science Engineering Majors.
Experiments illustrating principles of thermal-fluid systems and related measurement devices. Statistical design of experiments and uncertainty analysis of data; thermodynamic cycles, combustion, compressible and incompressible flows.
EME 115
Introduction to Numerical Analysis & Methods
(ENG 006 C- or better or EME 005 C- or better or ECS 030 C- or better or ECM 006 C- or better);  (MAT 021A C- or better,  MAT 021B C- or better,  MAT 021C C- or better,  MAT 021D C- or better,  MAT 022A C- or better,  MAT 022B C- or better);  (PHY 009A C- or better,  PHY 009B C- or better,  PHY 009C C- or better).
Number representation, Taylor expansions, error  and stability analysis, roots of nonlinear equations, sets of linear equations, numerical integration, ordinary differential equations.
EME 121
Engineering Applications of Dynamics
ENG 102 C- or better;  (ENG 006 C- or better or EME 005 C- or better or ECS 030 C- or better).Restricted to Mechanical Engineering, Aerospace Science & Engineering, and Mechanical Engineering/Materials Science Engineering majors.
Technical elective that revisits dynamic principles with emphasis on engineering applications; Equations of motion are derived and put into a format for computer solution; There is a computer laboratory where real engineering systems are simulated.
EME 134
Vehicle Stability
ENG 102 C- or better.Restricted to Mechanical Engineering, Aerospace Science & Engineering, and Mechanical Engineering/Materials Science Engineering majors.
Analytical and experimental studies of the dynamics, stability and control of vehicles such as cars, trailers, airplanes, motorcycles, bicycles and rail cars.
EME 139
Stability of Flexible Dynamic Systems
ENG 102 C- or better;  ENG 103 C- or better.
Stability of flexible systems. Introduction to fluid-structure interaction. Mechanical vibrations. Design of mechanical subsystems or systems under constraints. Dynamic instabilities. Flutter. Control effectiveness. Energy extraction from fluid-structure interactions. Design applications to aerospace, mechanical and biomedical systems.
EME 150A
Mechanical Design
(ENG 045 C- or better or ENG 045Y C- or better);  (ENG 104 C- or better,  EME 050 C- or better (can be concurrent)).Restricted to Mechanical Engineering, Aerospace Science & Engineering, Mechanical Engineering/Materials Science and Engineering majors.
Principles of mechanics applied to design. Deformation and stress analysis. Structural integrity under static and fluctuating loads. Projects demonstrate progression from concept to engineering analysis, with emphasis on strength and durability.
EME 150B
Mechanical Design
EME 150A C- or better.Restricted to Mechanical Engineering, Aerospace Science & Engineering, Mechanical Engineering/Materials Science and Engineering.
Principles of engineering mechanics applied to the design and selection of mechanical components. Design projects, which concentrate on conceptual design, engineering analysis, methods of manufacture, material selection, and cost.
EME 151
Statistical Methods in Design & Manufacturing
EME 150A C- or better.Restricted to Mechanical Engineering, Aerospace Science & Engineering, Mechanical Engineering/Materials Science and Engineering.
Methods of statistical analysis with emphasis on applications in mechanical design and manufacturing. Applications include product evaluation and decision making, probabilistic design, systems reliability, and fatigue under random loading.
EME 152
Computer-Aided Mechanism Design
ENG 102 C- or better;  (EME 005 C- or better or ENG 006 C- or better or ECS 030 C- or better).Restricted to Mechanical Engineering, Aerospace Science & Engineering, Mechanical Engineering/Materials Science and Engineering.
Principles of computer-aided mechanism design. Computer-aided kinematic, static, and dynamic analysis and design of planar mechanisms such as multiple-loop linkages and geared linkages. Introduction to kinematic synthesis of mechanisms.
EME 154
Mechatronics
ENG 100 C- or better;  ENG 102 C- or better;  EME 050 C- or better.Restricted to Mechanical Engineering, Aerospace Science & Engineering, Mechanical Engineering/Materials Science and Engineering.
Overview of mechatronics system and control system design concepts, control software architecture, control hardware architecture, microcontroller and interface technology for mechatronics control, sensor for mechatronics systems, actuator drives.
EME 161
Combustion & the Environment
EME 106 C- or better.
Introduction to combustion kinetics; premixed and diffusion flames; turbulent combustion; pollutant formation; examples of combustion devices such as internal combustion engines, gas turbines, furnaces and incinerators; alternative fuels.
EME 163
Internal Combustion Engines & Future Alternatives
EME 050 C- or better;  EME 106 C- or better.Restricted to Mechanical Engineering, Aerospace Science & Engineering, Mechanical Engineering/Materials Science and Engineering.
Fundamentals of internal combustion engine design and performance. Future needs to adapt to environmental concerns, and the feasibility of better alternatives in the future.
EME 164
Introduction to Heating, Ventilation & Air Conditioning Systems
EME 106 C- or better;  EME 165 C- or better.
Introduction to basic mechanisms and processes associated with heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC), including equipment and systems used for HVAC in residential and commercial buildings.
EME 165
Heat Transfer
(ENG 006 C- or better or EME 005 C- or better or ECS 030 C- or better);  ENG 103 C- or better;  ENG 105 C- or better.Restricted to Mechanical Engineering, Aerospace Science & Engineering, Mechanical Engineering/Materials Science and Engineering.
Conduction, convection, and radiation heat transfer. Computational modeling of heat transfer in engineering. Applications to engineering equipment with the use of digital computers.
EME 171
Analysis, Simulation & Design of Mechatronic Systems
ENG 100 C- or better;  ENG 102 C- or better.Restricted to Mechanical Engineering, Aerospace Science & Engineering, Mechanical Engineering/Materials Science and Engineering.
Modeling of dynamic engineering systems in various energy domains. Analysis and design of dynamic systems. Response of linear systems. Digital computer simulation and physical experiments.
EME 172
Automatic Control of Engineering Systems
ENG 100 C- or better;  ENG 102 C- or better.Restricted to Mechanical Engineering, Aerospace Science & Engineering, Mechanical Engineering/Materials Science and Engineering.
Classical feedback control systems; block diagrams; performance specifications; steady state errors; rise and settling times; root locus; PID controllers; Bode and Nyquist plots; stability; phase and gain margins; advanced topics as time allows.
EME 185A
Mechanical Engineering Systems Design Project
EME 050 C- or better;  EME 150A C- or better;  EME 165 C- or better (can be concurrent);  ENG 003, CMN 001 or CMN 003 recommended; upper division composition recommended.Restricted to Senior standing in Mechanical Engineering (EMEC).
Major mechanical engineering design experience; the mechanical engineering design process and its use in the design of engineering systems incorporating appropriate engineering standards and multiple realistic constraints.
EME 185B
Mechanical Engineering Systems Design Project
EME 185A;  senior standing in the Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering.
Major mechanical engineering design experience; the mechanical engineering design process and its use in the design of engineering systems incorporating appropriate engineering standards and multiple realistic constraints. 
EME 189A
Selected Topics in Mechanical Engineering: Energy Systems & the Environment
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study in Energy Systems & the Environment.
EME 189B
Selected Topics in Mechanical Engineering: Engineering Controls
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study in Engineering Controls.
EME 189C
Selected Topics in Mechanical Engineering: Engineering Dynamics
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study in Engineering Dynamics.
EME 189D
Selected Topics in Mechanical Engineering: Biomechanics
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study in Biomechanics.
EME 189E
Selected Topics in Mechanical Engineering: Fluid Mechanics
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study in Fluid Mechanics.
EME 189F
Selected Topics in Mechanical Engineering: Manufacturing Engineering
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study in Manufacturing Engineering.
EME 189G
Selected Topics in Mechanical Engineering: Mechanical Engineering & Product Design
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study in Mechanical Engineering & Product Design.
EME 189H
Selected Topics in Mechanical Engineering: Mechatronics Systems
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study in Mechatronics Systems.
EME 189I
Selected Topics in Mechanical Engineering: MEMS/Nanotechnology
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study in MEMS/Nanotechnology.
EME 189J
Selected Topics in Mechanical Engineering: Solid & Structural Mechanics
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study in Solid & Structural Mechanics.
EME 189K
Selected Topics in Mechanical Engineering: Thermodynamics
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study in Thermodynamics.
EME 189L
Selected Topics in Mechanical Engineering: Vehicle & Transportation Systems
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study in Vehicle & Transportation Systems.
EME 192
Intership in Engineering
Upper division standing; approval of project prior to period of internship.
Supervised work experience in mechanical engineering.
EME 197TC
Mentoring & Tutoring Engineering in the Community
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Mentoring, coaching, tutoring and/or supervision of students in K-12 schools in Engineering-related topics.
EME 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

EME 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

EMR 092
Emergency Medicine Clinical Research Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Undergraduate student in good academic standing at UC Davis.
Intended to give the undergraduate student an opportunity to conduct "hands-on" clinical research in the Emergency Department. Through the lecture/discussion, students will learn the basics of conducting and developing clinical research studies, using examples from ongoing studies.
EMR 092C
Joan Viteri Memorial Clinic Preceptorship
Consent of Instructor.
Directed towards the undergraduate students at UC Davis that volunteer at the Joan Viteri Memorial Clinic (JVMC).
EMR 192
Emergency Medicine Clinical Research Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Undergraduate student in good academic standing at UC Davis.
Intended to give the upper division undergraduate student an opportunity to conduct "hands-on" clinical research in the Emergency Department. Through the lecture/discussion, students learn the basics of conducting and developing clinical research studies.
EMR 192A
Joan Viteri Memorial Clinic (JVMC) Student Volunteer
Consent of Instructor.Open to undergraduate students only.
Field experience in health care delivery, patient histories and physical examinations, health promotions and disease prevention, diagnosis and treatment of episodic, acute and chronic illness, basic laboratory testing and appropriate referral and follow-up. Students must apply and interview.
EMR 199A
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.  Experienced RA's who have successfully performed in the EMRAP program for a minimum of three quarters; must have database skills.
For students interested in working on specific EM projects in a more extensive way. Must commit at least four hours per week for two quarters.
EMR 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.
Directed research in the Department of Emergency Medicine.
EMR 401
Preceptorship in Emergency Medicine
Consent of Instructor.
Exposure to the specialty of Emergency Medicine and observation of a wide array of patients in the Emergency Department. 
EMR 430
Introduction to Medical Toxicology
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year medical student in good standing.
In-depth review of clinical and medical toxicologic emergencies. Rotation includes contact with toxicology trained emergency faculty, didactic lectures, journal club, simulation training and exposure to a very busy poison control center.
EMR 435
Wilderness Medicine
Consent of Instructor.
Introductory elective course for students to explore how physicians can interact with the environment in austere conditions through lectures, hands-on/field experience, and case-based learning.
EMR 440
Emergency Medicine Clerkship
Satisfactory completion of Medicine, Surgery, and Pediatric Clerkship.
Students complete clinical shifts in the Emergency Department, functioning as Acting Intern. Treat a wide variety of patients and problems under the supervision of the EM Attending. Students are expected to take focused histories and present in clear, concise fashion.
EMR 445
Emergency Medicine Ultrasound for Fourth-Year Medical Student
Fourth-year Medical Student in good standing; interest in Emergency Medicine or Critical Care is recommended; EMR 440 or equivalent is recommended prior to the rotation.Limited enrollment.
Intended for students interested in learning both the technical and cognitive skills of bedside ultrasound. Emphasis will be on the use of ultrasound in emergency medicine as a diagnostic tool and in procedural guidance.
EMR 455A
Focus on POCUS A
Consent of Instructor.
Directed towards gaining a greater proficiency of point-of-care ultrasound. Particularly useful for those pursuing careers that use this modality heavily in clinical practice such as primary care, pediatrics, emergency medicine, critical care, physical medicine and rehabilitation, etc.  
EMR 455B
Focus on POCUS B
Consent of Instructor.
Directed towards gaining a greater proficiency of point-of-care ultrasound. Particularly useful for those pursuing careers that use this modality heavily in clinical practice such as primary care, pediatrics, emergency medicine, critical care, physical medicine and rehabilitation, etc.
EMR 465
Externship in Emergency Medicine
Satisfactory completion of Medicine, Surgery and Pediatrics.
Students complete clinical shifts in the Emergency Department, functioning as Acting Intern. Treat a wide variety of patients and problems under the supervision of the EM Attending. Students are expected to take focused histories and present in clear, concise fashion.
EMR 470
Pediatric Emergency Medicine Clerkship
Satisfactory completion of Medicine, Surgery, and Pediatrics.Restricted to fourth-year medical student in good standing only.
See patients in the Pediatric area of the Emergency Department under the supervision of an Emergency Medicine Attending. Emphasis on recognition and management of the acutely ill pediatric patient and treatment of common pediatric complaints.  
EMR 480
Understanding Health Policy: A Focus on Analysis & Translation
Consent of Instructor.
Paradigm of healthcare delivery in the U.S. is changing rapidly. To prepare the next generation of physician leaders, provide the skills, tools, and knowledge needed to impact decisions made at the policy level.
EMR 490
Emergency Procedures Elective
Current basic life support (BLS) certification.Restricted to fourth-year medical student in good standing only.
Simulator-based skills training for emergency procedures. Topics include airway management, central venous access, chest tube placement, and general critical care resuscitation skills. 
EMR 493A
Cardiac Arrest, Resuscitation & Repurfusion SSM
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to UC Davis School of Medicine students only.
Special Studies Module, a four-week course specific to the topics of Cardiac Arrest, Resusciatation & Repurfusion.
EMR 493B
Cardiac Arrest, Resuscitation & Repurfusion SSM
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to UC Davis School of Medicine students only.
Special Studies Module, a four-week course specific to the topics of Cardiac Arrest, Resusciatation & Repurfusion.
EMR 499
Research
Consent of Instructor.
Elective where topics may be selected in either basic or clinical research areas of Emergency and/or Critical Care Medicine. The
EMS 006H
Honors Materials Science Computer Applications
ENG 006 (can be concurrent);  Enrollment in the Materials Science & Engineering Honors Program; ENG 006 required concurrently.Restricted to students in the Materials Science & Engineering Honors Program.
Examination of materials science computer applications through additional readings, discussions, collaborative work, or special activities which may include projects or computer simulations.
EMS 009H
Honors Solid-State Materials Science
PHY 009D (can be concurrent);  Enrollment in the Materials Science & Engineering Honors Program; PHY 009D required concurrently.Restricted to students in the Materials Science & Engineering Honors Program.
Examination of solid-state materials science and modern physics topics through additional readings, discussions, collaborative work, or special activities which may include projects, laboratory experience or computer simulations.
EMS 147
Principles of Polymer Materials Science
CHE 002A;  CHE 002B;  ((CHE 008A,  CHE 008B) or (ENG 045 or ENG 045Y));  introductory physics.
Basic principles of polymer science presented including polymer structure and synthesis; polymerization mechanisms, polymer classes, properties, and reactions; polymer morphology, rheology, and characterization; polymer processing.
EMS 160
Thermodynamics of Materials Processes and Phase Stability
(ENG 045 C- or better or ENG 045Y C- or better);  PHY 009B C- or better;  MAT 022B C- or better;  CHE 002C recommended.
Review of thermodynamic principles of interest to materials scientists and engineers. Application of thermodynamics to material processing, phase stability, corrosion.
EMS 160
Thermodynamics of Materials
(ENG 045 C- or better or ENG 045Y C- or better);  PHY 009B C- or better;  MAT 022B C- or better;  CHE 002C recommended.
Review of thermodynamic principles of interest to materials scientists and engineers. Application of thermodynamics to material processing, phase stability, corrosion.
EMS 162
Structure & Characterization of Engineering Materials
(ENG 045 C- or better or ENG 045Y C- or better);  MAT 022A C- or better;  PHY 009B C- or better.
Description of the structure of engineering materials on the atomic scale by exploring the fundamentals of crystallography. Importance of this structure to materials properties. Description of experimental determination using x-ray diffraction techniques.
EMS 162L
Structure and Characterization of Materials Laboratory 
EMS 162 (can be concurrent);  Concurrent enrollment recommended.
Experimental investigations of structure of solid materials are combined with techniques for characterization of materials.  Laboratory exercises emphasize methods used to study structure of solids at the atomic and microstructural levels.  Methods focus on optical, x-ray and electron techniques.
EMS 162L
Structure & Characterization of Materials Laboratory 
EMS 162 (can be concurrent);  Concurrent enrollment in EMS 162 recommended.
Experimental investigations of structure of solid materials are combined with techniques for characterization of materials. Laboratory exercises emphasize methods used to study structure of solids at the atomic and microstructural levels. Methods focus on optical, x-ray and electron techniques.
EMS 164
Rate Processes in Materials Science
(ENG 045 C- or better or ENG 045Y C- or better);  EMS 160.
Basic kinetic laws and the principles governing phase transformations. Applications in diffusion, oxidation, nucleation, growth and spinodal transformations.
EMS 164
Kinetics of Materials
(ENG 045 C- or better or ENG 045Y C- or better);  EMS 160.
Basic kinetic laws and the principles governing phase transformations. Applications in diffusion, oxidation, nucleation, growth and spinodal transformations.
EMS 164
Kinetics of Materials
(ENG 045 C- or better or ENG 045Y C- or better);  EMS 160;  (ECH 060 or ENG 006).
Basic kinetic laws and the principles governing phase transformations. Applications in diffusion, oxidation, nucleation, growth and spinodal transformations.
EMS 170
Sustainable Energy Technologies: Batteries, Fuel Cells, & Photovoltaic Cells
ENG 045 or ENG 045Y.Open to students in Engineering or related fields.
Basic principles of future energy devices such as lithium batteries, fuel cells, and photovoltaic cells. Examines the current status of these energy technologies and analyze challenges that still must be overcome.
EMS 170L
Sustainable Energy Technologies Laboratory
ENG 045;  EMS 170 (can be concurrent);  EMS 172 (recommended).
Fundaments of manufacturing and characterization of energy devices, such as lithium batteries, fuel cells and photovoltaic cells. Discussion on limiting factors in the performance of the devices. 
EMS 172
Electronic, Optical and Magnetic Properties of Materials
CHE 110A or PHY 009D;  ENG 006 or ECM 006 or equivalent recommended.
Electronic, optical, and magnetic properties of materials as related to structure and processing of solid state materials. Physical principles for understanding the properties of metals, semiconductors, ceramics, and amorphous solids and the applications of these materials in engineering. 
EMS 172
Smart Materials
CHE 110A or PHY 009D;  ENG 006 or ECH 060 or equivalent recommended.
Electronic, optical, and magnetic properties of materials as related to structure and processing of solid state materials. Physical principles for understanding the properties of metals, semiconductors, ceramics, and amorphous solids and the applications of these materials in engineering. 
EMS 172L
Electronic, Optical and Magnetic Properties Laboratory
EMS 172 (can be concurrent);  Concurrent enrollment recommended.
Experimental investigation of electronic, optical and magnetic properties of engineering materials, emphasizing the fundamental relationship between microstructure and properties as well as  the influence of rate processes on the evolution of the microstructure and properties.
EMS 172L
Smart Materials Laboratory
EMS 172 (can be concurrent);  Concurrent enrollment in EMS 172 recommended.
Experimental investigation of electronic, optical and magnetic properties of engineering materials, emphasizing the fundamental relationship between microstructure and properties as well as the influence of rate processes on the evolution of the microstructure and properties.
EMS 174
Mechanical Behavior of Materials 
(ENG 045 C- or better or ENG 045Y C- or better);  EMS 162 recommended.
Microscopic and macroscopic aspects of the mechanical behavior of engineering materials, with emphasis on recent development in materials characterization by nondestructive testing. Fundamental aspects of plasticity in engineering materials, strengthening mechanisms and mechanical failure modes of materials systems.
EMS 174L
Mechanical Behavior Laboratory 
EMS 174 (can be concurrent);  Concurrent enrollment recommended.
Experimental investigation of mechanical behavior of engineering materials.  Laboratory exercises emphasize the fundamental relationship between microstructure and mechanical properties, and the evolution of the microstructure as a consequence of rate process.
EMS 174L
Mechanical Behavior Laboratory 
EMS 174 (can be concurrent);  Concurrent enrollment recommended.
Experimental investigation of mechanical behavior of engineering materials.  Laboratory exercises emphasize the fundamental relationship between microstructure and mechanical properties, and the evolution of the microstructure as a consequence of rate process.
EMS 180
Materials in Engineering Design
ENG 045 C- or better or ENG 045Y C- or better.Restricted to students with upper division standing.
Quantitative treatment of materials selection for engineering applications. Discussion of design and material selection strategy; process and process selection strategy; process economics; life-cycle thinking and eco-design. Use of materials selection software.
EMS 180
Materials in Engineering Design
ENG 045 C- or better or ENG 045Y C- or better.Restricted to students with upper division standing.
Quantitative treatment of materials selection for engineering applications. Discussion of design & material selection strategy; process & process selection strategy; process economics; life-cycle thinking & eco-design. Use of materials selection software.
EMS 181
Materials Processing
(ENG 045 C- or better or ENG 045Y C- or better);  (ENG 105 or ECH 152B or EEC 140A or EMS 164).
Principles of phase equilibria, thermodynamics and reaction kinetics applied to materials processing. Effects of processing variables on the structure-property relationship. Fundamentals of the manufacturing processes for electronic, optical, functional and structural materials. 
EMS 181
Manufacturing of 3D & Composite Materials
(ENG 045 C- or better or ENG 045Y C- or better);  (ENG 105 or ECH 152B or EEC 140A or EMS 164).
Fundamental physical and chemical principles underlying various processing techniques, used in manufacturing processes for bulk (3D) and composite structural and functional materials. Effects of processing variables on structure-property relationships. 
EMS 182
Failure Analysis
ENG 045 C- or better or ENG 045Y C- or better;  EMS 174 recommended.
Analysis of the way materials fail. Effects of temperature, mechanical deformation and corrosion on the properties of materials. forensics and methodologies for investigating failures of materials including optical microscopy, x-ray analysis and scanning electron microscopy. Investigation of practical problems.
EMS 183
Processing of 2D & Nanomaterials
(ENG 045 C- or better or ENG 045Y C- or better);  (ENG 105 or ECH 152B or EEC 140A or EMS 164).
Fundamentals of processing methods for two-dimensional materials, including thin films and graphene-like materials; as well as nanomaterials, including nanoparticles, nanowires, and quantum dots.
EMS 188A
Materials Design Project
EMS 160;  EMS 162;  EMS 164;  EMS 172;  EMS 174.
Major materials design experience involving analysis of real materials synthesis/processing/fabrication and technological applications including critical assessments of economic, manufacturing, and ethical constraints. Various principles of materials science are integrated into a culminating team design project.
EMS 188AH
Honors Materials Design 
Enrollment in the Materials Science & Engineering Honors Program.Open only to students in the Materials Science & Engineering Honors Program.
Examination of special topics covered in the materials design course through additional readings, discussions, collaborative work, or special activities which may include projects, laboratory experience or computer simulations.
EMS 188B
Materials Design Project
EMS 188A.
Major materials design experience involving analysis of real materials synthesis/processing/fabrication and technological applications including critical assessments of economic, manufacturing, and ethical constraints. Various principles of materials science are integrated into a culminating team design project.
EMS 188BH
Honors Materials Design 
Enrollment in the Materials Science & Engineering Honors Program.Open only to students in the Materials Science & Engineering Honors Program.
Examination of special topics covered in the materials design course through additional readings, discussions, collaborative work, or special activities which may include projects, laboratory experience or computer simulations.
EMS 190C
Research Group Conference
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Individual and/or group conference on problems, progress and techniques in materials research.
EMS 192
Internship in Materials Science & Engineering
Consent of Instructor.
Supervised work experience in the Materials Science & Engineering field.
EMS 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Group study of selected topics.
EMS 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.
Special study for advanced undergraduates.
EMS 230
Fundamentals of Electron Microscopy
EMS 162.
Principles and techniques of scanning and transmission of electron microscopy used in the study of materials will be described. Emphasis upon practical applications. 
EMS 230L
Laboratory for Electron Microscopy
EMS 230 (can be concurrent);  EMS 230 required concurrently.
Practical application of techniques of electron scanning and transmission microscopy including x-ray microanalysis.
EMS 244
Interaction of Materials & their Environment
(ENG 045 or ENG 045Y);  ENG 105A recommended; or consent of instructor.
Thermodynamic and kinetic foundations of the corrosion and oxidation processes. Practical aspects of corrosion control and prevention. Stress-corrosion and gas-embrittlement phenomena. Special topics in corrosion; microbiological and atmospheric corrosion.
EMS 245
Micro- & Nano-Technology in Life Sciences
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Survey of biodevice design from engineering and biological perspectives; micro-/nano-fabrication techniques; surface science and mass transport; essential biological processes and models; proposal development skills on merging aforementioned themes.
EMS 246
Photovoltaics & Solar Cells
EEC 140B;  or Consent of Instructor.  Or equivalent.
Physics and application of photovoltaics and solar cells, including design, fabrication technology, and grid incorporation. Mono and microcrystalline silicon devices; thin-film technologies, heterojunction and organic-semiconductor technologies. Collectors, electrical inverters and infrastructure issues. Challenges and concerns.	
EMS 248
Fracture of Engineering Materials
EMS 174.
Description of the failure of materials by crack propagation.  Topics include the stress fields about elastic cracks, the Griffith-Irwin analysis, descriptions of plastic zones, fracture toughness testing, microstructural aspects of fracture and failure at elevated temperatures.
EMS 249
Mechanisms of Fatigue
EMS 174;  or Consent of Instructor.  EMS 248 recommended.
Microstructural description of the mechanisms of fatigue in metals.  Topics include a phenomenological treatment of cyclic deformation, dislocation processes in cyclic deformation, fatigue crack nucleation, Stage I growth, threshold effects and high temperature cyclic deformation.
EMS 250A
Special Topics in Polymer & Fiber Science
EMS 147;  or Consent of Instructor.
Selected topics of current interest in polymer and fiber sciences. Topics vary each time course is offered. 
EMS 250B
Special Topics in Polymer & Fiber Science
EMS 147;  or Consent of Instructor.
Selected topics of current interest in polymer and fiber sciences. Topics vary each time course is offered. 
EMS 250C
Special Topics in Polymer and Fiber Science
EMS 147;  or Consent of Instructor.
Selected topics of current interest in polymer and fiber sciences. Topics will vary each time the course is offered. 
EMS 250C
Special Topics in Polymer and Fiber Science
EMS 147;  or Consent of Instructor.
Selected topics of current interest in polymer and fiber sciences. Topics will vary each time the course is offered. 
EMS 250D
Special Topics in Polymer and Fiber Science
EMS 147;  or Consent of Instructor.
Selected topics of current interest in polymer and fiber sciences. Topics will vary each time the course is offered. 
EMS 250D
Special Topics in Polymer and Fiber Science
EMS 147;  or Consent of Instructor.
Selected topics of current interest in polymer and fiber sciences. Topics will vary each time the course is offered. 
EMS 250E
Special Topics in Polymer & Fiber Science
EMS 147;  or Consent of Instructor.
Selected topics of current interest in polymer and fiber sciences. Topics vary each time course is offered. 
EMS 250F
Special Topics in Polymer and Fiber Science
EMS 147;  or Consent of Instructor.
Selected topics of current interest in polymer and fiber sciences. Topics will vary each time the course is offered. 
EMS 250F
Special Topics in Polymer and Fiber Science
EMS 147;  or Consent of Instructor.
Selected topics of current interest in polymer and fiber sciences. Topics will vary each time the course is offered. 
EMS 260
Advanced Thermodynamics of Solids
EMS 160.
Thermodynamic principles, formalism and their application to solid materials. Specific examples from ceramic and solid state systems. Use of thermodynamic approach in developing understanding of and constraints for processes in real systems.
EMS 260
Advanced Thermodynamics of Solids
EMS 160.
Thermodynamic principles, formalism and their application to solid materials. Statistical mechanics and the relations between microscopic and macroscopic properties. Prediction of phase diagrams and phase stability, particularly for solids.
EMS 262
Advanced Topics in Structure of Materials
EMS 162;  EMS 174 recommended; graduate standing in Engineering or consent of instructor.
Nature of microstructure in engineering materials. Crystalline and non-crystalline structures, with special emphasis on grain boundary segregation in the development of polycrystalline microstructure and the radial distribution function of amorphous materials.
EMS 264
Transport Phenomena in Materials Processes
Graduate standing in Engineering.
Thermodynamic driving forces and atomic-scale mechanisms underlying diffusive mass transport and interface motion in materials.  Nucleation, growth and coarsening dynamics of phase transformations. 
EMS 272
Advanced Functional Properties of Materials
Graduate standing in Physics, Chemistry, and Engineering.
Fundamental physical properties of solid materials important to solid state devices, specifically electronic, magnetic, and optical properties. Topics include band structures, metals, superconductors, semiconductors, dielectrics, optical properties, and magnetic properties and implementation of these properties into devices.
EMS 274
Advanced Mechanical Properties of Materials
EMS 174.
Comprehensive study of mechanical properties of materials, with special attention to dislocations and deformation and fracture control mechanisms. Mechanical properties of conventional engineering materials as well as advanced materials such as nanocrystalline solids and thin films are considered.
EMS 280A
Graduate Capstone Project
Graduate standing in an engineering discipline.
Advanced materials design experience involving analysis of engineering applications of materials, including synthesis, processing, and fabrication. Additional consideration of critical assessments of economics, manufacturing, and ethical constraints. Fundamental principles of materials science are integrated into a culminating capstone project.
EMS 280B
Graduate Capstone Project
EMS 280A.
Advanced materials design experience involving analysis of engineering applications of materials, including synthesis, processing and fabrication. Additional consideration of critical assessments of economics, manufacturing, and ethical constraints. Fundamental principles of materials science are integrated into a culminating capstone project.
EMS 282
Glass: Science & Technology
Graduate standing in Chemistry, Physics or Engineering, or consent of instructor.
Modern paradigms in glass science and their applications to technologies. Relation of macroscopic properties of glasses and glass-forming liquids to atomic-level structures, including principles of formation, relaxation, transport phenomena, nucleation, crystallization and phase separation in glasses.
EMS 289A
Special Topics in Materials Science; Electronic Materials
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Electronic Materials.
EMS 289A
Special Topics in Materials Science
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in the discipline of Materials Science & Engineering. Topics will vary by instructor.
EMS 289B
Special Topics in Materials Science; Ceramics and Minerals
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Ceramics and Minerals.
EMS 289B
Special Topics in Materials Science; Ceramics and Minerals
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Ceramics and Minerals.
EMS 289C
Special Topics in Materials Science; Physics and Chemistry of Materials
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Physics and Chemistry of Materials.
EMS 289C
Special Topics in Materials Science; Physics and Chemistry of Materials
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Physics and Chemistry of Materials.
EMS 289D
Special Topics in Materials Science; Materials Processing
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Materials Processing.
EMS 289D
Special Topics in Materials Science; Materials Processing
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Materials Processing.
EMS 289E
Special Topics in Materials Science; Materials Science and Forensics
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Materials Science and Forensics.
EMS 289E
Special Topics in Materials Science; Materials Science and Forensics
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Materials Science and Forensics.
EMS 289F
Special Topics in Materials Science; Biomaterials
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Biomaterials.
EMS 289F
Special Topics in Materials Science; Biomaterials
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Biomaterials.
EMS 289G
Special Topics in Materials Science; Surface Chemistry of Metal Oxides
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Surface Chemistry of Metal Oxides.
EMS 289G
Special Topics in Materials Science; Surface Chemistry of Metal Oxides
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Surface Chemistry of Metal Oxides.
EMS 290
Materials Science & Engineering Seminar
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Selected topics of current interest in Materials Science & Engineering. Subjects covered vary from year to year and are announced at the beginning of each quarter.
EMS 290C
Graduate Research Conference
Consent of Instructor.
Individual and/or group conference on problems, progress, and techniques in Materials Science & Engineering research. 
EMS 292
Materials Science & Engineering Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate level standing.
Work or lab experience in industry or off-campus lab focusing on Materials Science & Engineering applications at the graduate level.
EMS 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.
Research.
EMS 390
The Teaching of Materials Science
Meet qualifications for teaching assistant and/or associate-in in Materials Science & Engineering.
Participation as a teaching assistant or associate-in in a designated engineering course. Methods of leading discussion groups or laboratory sections, writing and grading quizzes, use of laboratory equipment, and grading laboratory reports.
ENG 003
Introduction to Engineering Design
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).Pass One restricted to lower division College of Engineering students; Pass Two restricted to lower division students.
Introduction to the engineering design process that incorporates the development of oral and written communication skills integral to the design process. Conducted in workshop format with hands-on engagement in the design process.
ENG 006
Engineering Problem Solving
(MAT 016A C- or better or MAT 017A C- or better or MAT 021A C- or better);  (MAT 016B C- or better (can be concurrent) or MAT 017B C- or better (can be concurrent) or MAT 021B C- or better (can be concurrent)).
Methodology for solving engineering problems. Engineering computing and visualization based on MATLAB. Engineering examples and applications.
ENG 010
The Science Behind the Technology in Our Lives
High school algebra.
Understanding of how the technology in our lives works using only basic concepts and rudimentry mathematics.
ENG 011A
Issues in Engineering
Consent of Instructor.
Engineering profession and its role in society; engineering design and development process; introduction to the engineering grand challenges; and professional resources for students.
ENG 011B
Issues in Engineering
Consent of Instructor.
Engineering disciplines; the engineering professions methods, principles, and career opportunities; professional resources for students.
ENG 017
Circuits I
MAT 021C;  C- or better recommended.
Basic electric circuit analysis techniques, including electrical quantities and elements, resistive circuits, transient and steady-state responses of RLC circuits, sinusoidal excitation and phasors, and complex frequency and network functions.
ENG 020
Introduction to Space Exploration: Understanding the Technological & Environmental Challenges to Our Exploration of the Solar System
High school level Algebra, Geometry, General Science (Physics and Chemistry).
Introductory overview of the space environment. Discussion of space exploration technology including propulsion, orbital mechanics, and spacecraft engineering.
ENG 035
Statics
(PHY 009A C- or better or PHY 009HA C- or better);  MAT 021D C- or better (can be concurrent).
Force systems and equilibrium conditions with emphasis on engineering problems.
ENG 045
Properties of Materials
(MAT 016C C- or better or MAT 021C C- or better);  (CHE 002A C- or better,  PHY 009A C- or better).
Introduction to the properties of engineering materials and their relation to the internal structure of materials.
ENG 045
Properties of Materials
(MAT 016C C- or better or MAT 021C C- or better);  CHE 002A C- or better;  PHY 009A C- or better.
Introduction to the properties of engineering materials and their relation to the internal structure of materials.
ENG 045H
Honors Properties of Materials 
ENG 045 (can be concurrent) or ENG 045Y (can be concurrent);  Enrollment in the Materials Science and Engineering Honors Program; ENG 045 or ENG 045Y required concurrently.Open only to students in the Materials Science and Engineering Honors Program.
Examination of special materials science and engineering topics through additional readings, discussions, collaborative work, or special activities which may include projects, laboratory experience or computer simulations.
ENG 045Y
Properties of Materials
(MAT 016C C- or better or MAT 021C C- or better);  CHE 002A;  PHY 009A.
Introduction to the properties of engineering materials and their relation to the internal structure of materials.
ENG 045Y
Properties of Materials
(MAT 016C C- or better or MAT 021C C- or better);  CHE 002A C- or better;  PHY 009A C- or better.
Introduction to the properties of engineering materials and their relation to the internal structure of materials.
ENG 100
Electronic Circuits & Systems
ENG 017;  C- or better recommended.
Introduction to analog and digital circuit and system design through hands on laboratory design projects. 
ENG 102
Dynamics
ENG 035 C- or better;  MAT 022B C- or better.Open to College of Engineering students only.
Kinematics and kinetics of particles, systems of particles, and of rigid bodies; application of these topics are applied to engineering problems.
ENG 103
Fluid Mechanics
ENG 035 C- or better;  MAT 022B C- or better;  PHY 009B C- or better.Open to students in the College of Engineering and Hydrology majors.
Fluid properties, fluid statics, continuity and linear momentum equations for control volumes, flow of incompressible fluids in pipes, dimensional analysis and boundary-layer flows.
ENG 104
Mechanics of Materials
ENG 035 C- or better;  MAT 022B C- or better.Open to Engineering majors only.
Uniaxial loading and deformation. General concepts of stress-strain-temperature relations and yield criteria. Torsion of shafts. Bending of beams. Deflections due to bending. Introduction to stability and buckling.
ENG 104
Mechanics of Materials
ENG 035 C- or better;  (MAT 022B C- or better or MAT 027B C- or better).Open to Engineering majors only.
Uniaxial loading and deformation. General concepts of stress-strain-temperature relations and yield criteria. Torsion of shafts. Bending of beams. Deflections due to bending. Introduction to stability and buckling.
ENG 104L
Mechanics of Materials Laboratory
ENG 104.
Experiments which illustrate the basic principles and verify the analysis procedures used in the mechanics of materials are performed using the basic tools and techniques of experimental stress analysis.
ENG 105
Thermodynamics
MAT 022B C- or better;  PHY 009B C- or better.Open to College of Engineering students only.
Fundamentals of thermodynamics: heat energy and work, properties of pure substances, First and Second Law for closed and open systems, reversibility, entropy, thermodynamic temperature scales. Applications of thermodynamics to engineering systems. May be taught abroad.
ENG 106
Engineering Economics
Upper division standing in Engineering.
The analysis of problems in engineering economy; the selection of alternatives; replacement decisions. Compounding, tax, origins and cost of capital, economic life, and risk and uncertainty are applied to methods of selecting most economic alternatives.
ENG 111
Electric Machinery Fundamentals
ENG 017 C- or better.
Principles of AC and DC electric motors and generators, their control systems and power sources. Selection of electric power equipment components based on their construction features and performance characteristics.
ENG 121
Fluid Power Actuators & Systems
ENG 100 C- or better;  ENG 102 C- or better.
Hydraulic and pneumatic systems with emphasis on analysis and control of actuators. Design of hydraulic and pneumatic systems, specification and sizing of components, and selection of electro-hydraulics/electro-pneumatics, servo valves, and closed loop systems to solve basic control problems.
ENG 122
Introduction to Mechanical Vibrations
ENG 102 C- or better;  (ENG 006 C- or better or ENG 005 C- or better or ECS 030 C- or better);  Ability to program in MATLAB.
Free and forced vibrations in lumped-parameter systems with and without damping; vibrations in coupled systems; electromechanical analogs; use of energy conservation principles.
ENG 160
Environmental Physics & Society
(PHY 009D or PHY 010 or PHY 001B);  MAT 016B;  Or the equivalent of MAT 016B.
Impact of humankind on the environment are discussed from the point of view of the physical sciences. Calculations based on physical principles will be made, and the resulting policy implications are considered.
ENG 180
Engineering Analysis
(ENG 006 C- or better or EME 005 C- or better or ECS 030 C- or better);  (MAT 021D C- or better,  MAT 022B C- or better).
Solutions of systems of linear and nonlinear algebraic equations; approximation methods; solutions of ordinary differential equations; initial and boundary value problems; solutions of partial differential equations of Elliptic, parabolic, and hyperbolic types; Eigen value problems.
ENG 188
Science & Technology of Sustainable Power Generation
PHY 007C or PHY 009C;  upper division standing.
Focus on scientific understanding and development of power generation that is the basis of modern society. Concentration on power generation methods that are sustainable, in particular, discussion of the most recent innovations.
ENG 250
Technology Management
Consent of Instructor.
Management of the engineering and technology activity. Functions of design, planning, production, marketing, sales, and maintenance. Technological product life cycle. Research and development activity. Project planning and organization. Manufacturing issues. Case studies.
ENH 100
Urban Forestry
ENH 001 or PLS 002 or BIS 002B.
Principles and practices of planning and managing urban vegetation. Basics of tree appraisal, natural resource inventory, and development of long term urban forest management plans.
ENH 101
Trees of the Urban Forest
ENH 006;  or Consent of Instructor.
Identification and evaluation of 200 tree species of the urban forest on campus, in the Arboretum, and in the city of Davis; appraised and aesthetic values, condition, and branch structure; contribution of trees to this ecosystem. Bicycle required.
ENH 102
Physiological Principles in Environmental Horticulture
BIS 001C.
Physiological principles and processes essential to floriculture, nursery crop production, turfculture and landscape horticulture.Emphasis on the control of vegetative and reproductive development for a broad species range in greenhouse and extensive landscape environments.
ENH 105
Taxonomy & Ecology of Environmental Plant Families
ENH 006;  or Consent of Instructor.
Classification and identification of introduced and native species used in urban forests, with emphasis on floral and vegetative characteristics of the prominent families of angiosperms and gymnosperms, adaptations to environmental variations in western landscapes, and horticultural classification.
ENH 120
Management of Container Media
SSC 010 or SSC 100.
Principles of soil science and practices related to management of container media are taught, emphasizing appropriate use of soils and amendments, irrigation, and fertilizers.Physical and chemical properties are tested and effects of management on crops are evaluated in the laboratory.
ENH 125
Greenhouse & Nursery Crop Production
PLS 002 or BIS 002C.
Principles and techniques for the production of ornamental greenhouse and nursery crops. Hands-on experience producing greenhouse crops. Optional weekend field trip.
ENH 133
Woody Plants in the Landscape: Growth, Ecology & Management
PLS 002 or BIS 002C.
Principles and practices of managing trees and shrubs in the urban landscape and other managed environments. Topics include woody plant form; growth response and adaptation; tree management in relation to soil, moisture, climate; plant problems.
ENH 150
Genetics & Plant Conservation: The Biodiversity Crisis
BIS 001C;  Or the equivalent.
Conservation of genic diversity, measurement of diversity, threats to diversity and reasons for protection, the process of extinction, distribution of diversity, determination of what to conserve and means of conservation. Examples drawn largely from forest tree species.
ENH 160
Restoration Ecology
PLB 117 or EVE 117 or PLS 147;  or equivalent course in ecology/plant ecology.
Application of ecological complexity to restoration design, implementation and monitoring across variable environments and under changing environmental conditions. Integration of physiology, population, community, ecosystem, and landscape ecology.
ENH 160
Restoration Ecology
PLB 117 or EVE 117 or PLS 147;  or equivalent course in ecology/plant ecology.
Broad, interdisciplinary approach to effective restoration. Design and implementation of restoration projects based on principles of physiology, population, community, ecosystem and landscape ecology.
ENH 160L
Restoration Ecology Laboratory
ENH 160 (can be concurrent);  and Consent of Instructor.
Companion field course to ENH 160.  Series of part-day and all day visits to various field sites, involving site evaluations, guest field presentations by local restorationists, and actual restoration activities.
ENL 003
Introduction to Literature
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Introductory study of several genres of English literature, emphasizingboth analysis of particular works and the range of forms and styles in English prose and poetry. Frequent writing assignments will be made.
ENL 004
Critical Inquiry & Literature: Freshman Seminar
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).Enrollment limited to freshmen.
Critical inquiry into significant literary texts. Emphasis on close reading, classroom dialogue, and the writing of several papers or a longer seminar paper.
ENL 005F
Introduction to Creative Writing: Fiction
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Elementary principles of writing fiction. Write both in prescribed forms and in experimental forms of their own choosing. No final examination.
ENL 005NF
Introduction to Creative Writing: Non-Fiction
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Elementary principles of writing creative non-fiction. Work in prescribed literary forms (such as essay, meditation, biography, memoir, book review, documentary, or experimental non-fiction forms) and forms of students' choosing. No final examination.
ENL 005P
Introduction to Creative Writing: Poetry
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Elementary principles of writing poetry. Write both in prescribed forms and in experimental forms of their own choosing. No final examination.
ENL 010A
Literatures in English I: To 1700
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Or equivalent.
Historical introduction to English language and literature from 800-1700. Linguistic borrowing, innovation, and change. Emergence of key literary genres. Colonial America as a new site of English literary production and consumption.
ENL 010B
Literatures in English II: 1700-1900
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Or equivalent.
Historical introduction to English language and literature from 1700-1900. Linguistic borrowing, innovation, colonization, and change. Emergence and development of key literary genres. America, Britain, Ireland, Scotland, and India as important sites of English literary production and consumption.
ENL 010C
Literatures in English III: 1900 to Present
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Or equivalent.
Historical introduction to English language and literature from 1900-present. Linguistic borrowing, innovation, and change. Emergence and development of key literary genres. Formal experimentation. Modernism as transnational phenomenon.
ENL 040
Introductory Topics in Literature
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Or equivalent.
Study of a special topic. Literature written in English in any period or place or genre.  Thematic, formal, or temporal focus.
ENL 041
Introductory Topics in Literature & Media
ENL 003 or (UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y);  Or equivalent.
Study of a topic centered on the relationships between literature and moving-image media.
ENL 042
Approaches to Reading
ENL 003 or (UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y);  Or equivalent.
Close reading and interpretation of literature from a variety of traditional and contemporary approaches.  Topics include traditional textual and historical approaches; new criticism; formalism; psychological criticism; feminism and gender; reader-response; materialist approaches. Frequent written assignments.
ENL 043
Introductory Topics in Drama
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Or equivalent.
Close reading of, and topics relating to selected works of British and American drama from a range of historical periods.
ENL 044
Introductory Topics in Fiction
ENL 003 or (UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y);  Or equivalent.
Close reading of, and topics relating to, British and American Fiction: short stories, novellas, novels.  
ENL 045
Introductory Topics in Poetry
ENL 003 or (UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y);  Or equivalent.
Topical study and close reading of selections from English and American poetry.
ENL 092
Internship in English 
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  and Consent of Instructor.
Internships in fields where students can practice their skills. May be taught abroad.
ENL 098
Directed Group Study
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  and Consent of Instructor.

ENL 098F
Student Facilitated Course
ENL 003 or (UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y);  Consent of Instructor.
Student facilitated course intended primarily for lower division students.
ENL 100F
Creative Writing: Fiction
ENL 005F or ENL 005P;  ENL 005NF;  and Consent of Instructor.Priority given to English (Creative Writing) majors. 
Writing of fiction. No final examination.
ENL 100FA
Creative Writing Advanced Fiction
ENL 100F.Priority given to English majors; admission by application only.
Development and evaluation of students' work in prose, primarily in the workshop format. Some reading and discussion of published novels and short stories. Conferences with individual students once per quarter. 
ENL 100NF
Creative Writing: Non-Fiction
ENL 005F or ENL 005P or ENL 005NF;  and Consent of Instructor.Priority given to English (Creative Writing) majors.
Writing of non-fiction. No final examination.
ENL 100P
Creative Writing: Poetry
ENL 005F or ENL 005P or ENL 005NF;  and Consent of Instructor.Priority given to English (Creative Writing) majors.
Writing of poetry. 
ENL 100PA
Creative Writing Advanced Poetry
ENL 100P.Priority to English majors; admission by application only.
Development and evaluation of students' work in poetry, primarily in the workshop format. Some reading and discussion of published works of poetry. Conferences with individual students once per quarter. 
ENL 105
History of the English Language
ENL 003 or (UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y);  Or the equivalent.
History of the English language. Examination of the language as recorded from Old English to present-day English. Relationship of English toother languages; development of vocabulary, phonology, and grammatical patterns.
ENL 106
English Grammar
ENL 003 or LIN 001 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  or Consent of Instructor.
Survey of present-day English grammar as informed by contemporary linguistic theories. The major syntactic structures of English; their variation across dialects, styles, and registers; their development; and their usefulness in describing the conventions of English.
ENL 106P
English Grammar Practicum
ENL 106;  LIN 106 (can be concurrent).
Practice in teaching the principles of grammar to the kinds of audiences teachers encounter in California.  Discussions with teachers who teach in these areas.  Examination of pedagogical research on teaching grammar.
ENL 107
Freedom of Expression
ENL 003 or (UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y);  Or the equivalent.
Historical development of fundamental issues and contemporary controversies about freedom of expression, with emphasis on literary and artistic censorship. 
ENL 110A
Introduction to Literary Theory
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y.
Key theoretical terms, concepts, and thinkers from the Greeks to the modern era.
ENL 110B
Introduction to Modern Literary & Critical Theory
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y.
History of literary criticism in the modern era, with emphasis on the ties with the past and the special problems presented by modern literary theory.
ENL 111
Topics in Medieval Literature
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Or the equivalent.
Historically or thematically focused intensive examination of selected topics in Medieval British literature.
ENL 113A
Chaucer: Troilus & the "Minor" Poems
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Or the equivalent.
Development of the poet's artistry and ideas from his first work to his masterpiece, "Troilus and Criseyde."
ENL 113B
Chaucer: The Canterbury Tales
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Or the equivalent.
Literary analysis of the complete "Canterbury Tales."  Courtly love, literary forms, medieval science and astrology, theology and dogma as they inform the reading of Chaucer's work.
ENL 115
Topics in 16th- & 17th-Century Literature
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y.
Historically or thematically focused study of works of the Renaissance.
ENL 117
Shakespeare
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Or equivalent.
Historically, generically, or thematically focused study of Shakespeare's works.
ENL 120
Law & Literature
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Or the equivalent.
Historically, thematically, or generically focused study of the relationship between law and literature.
ENL 122
Milton
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y.
Selected major works, including Paradise Lost.
ENL 123
18th-Century British Literature
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y.
Historically or thematically focused study of 18th-century English literature.
ENL 125
Topics in Irish Literature
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Or equivalent.
Intensive study or treatment of special topics relating to the emergence, invention, and re-invention of Irish literature.  
ENL 130
British Romantic Literature
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Or the equivalent.
Historically or thematically focused study of works of Romantic English literature. 
ENL 133
19th-Century British Literature
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Or the equivalent.
Historically or thematically focused study of works of 19th-century English literature.
ENL 137
British Literature, 1900-1945
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Or the equivalent.
Historically or thematically focused study of works of British literature (drama, poetry, prose fiction) from the period between 1900 and the end of World War II.
ENL 138
British Literature, 1945 to Present
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Or the equivalent.
Historically or thematically focused study of works of British literature (drama, poetry, prose fiction) from the period between 1945 and the present. May be taught abroad.
ENL 139
Topics in Global Literatures & Cultures
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y.
Historically or regionally focused study of world literatures in English (other than the national literatures of British Isles and the United States), particularly from post-colonial regions in Africa, the Caribbean, and Asia, and immigrant cultures in the English-speaking world. 
ENL 140
Topics in Postcolonial Literatures & Cultures
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Or the equivalent.
Study of postcolonial literature of Anglophone colonies. Specific emphases may include literature from and about Anglophone India, the Caribbean, the Middle East, South Asia, Africa, and/or South America.
ENL 141
Topics in Diasporic Literatures & Migration
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Or the equivalent.
Study of literatures, histories, and cultures of one or more diasporic groups.
ENL 142
Early American Literature
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Or the equivalent.
Historically or thematically focused study of American literature of the 17th and 18th centuries. 
ENL 143
19th-Century American Literature to the Civil War
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Or the equivalent.
Historically or thematically focused study of works of 19th-century American literature. 
ENL 144
Post-Civil War American Literature
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Or the equivalent.
Historically or thematically focused study of works of post-Civil War American literature. 
ENL 146
American Literature 1900-1945
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Or the equivalent.
Historically or thematically focused study of American literature (drama, poetry, prose fiction) from the period between 1900 and the end of World War II.
ENL 147
American Literature, 1945 to the Present
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Or equivalent.
Historically or thematically focused study of American literature (drama, poetry, prose fiction) from the period between 1945 and the present.
ENL 149
Topics in Literature
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y.
Intensive examination of literature considered in topical terms, not necessarily historically. May be taught abroad.
ENL 150A
British Drama to 1800
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Or the equivalent.
Historically or thematically focused study of works of English drama prior to 1800.
ENL 150B
Drama from 1800 to the Present
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Or the equivalent.
Historically or thematically focused study of works of British drama from 1800 to the present.
ENL 153
Topics in Drama
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y.
Historical or thematic study of drama.
ENL 154
The Graphic Novel
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Or equivalent courses.
Thematically, historically, and formally focused study of the graphic novel genre. Contents may include any regional, national, or transnational group of graphic novels.
ENL 155A
18th-Century British Novel
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Or the equivalent.
Historically or thematically organized examination of the 18th-century British novel, with particular emphasis on its evolution, including the epistolary novel, the picaresque novel, and the Gothic novel: Richardson, Fielding, Sterne, Austen.
ENL 155B
19th-Century British Novel
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Or the equivalent.
Historically or thematically organized examination of 19th-century British novelists, with emphasis on the historical novel, the social novel, and novels by women: Scott, Dickens, the Brontes, Eliot, Hardy.
ENL 155C
20th-Century British Novel
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Or the equivalent.
Historically or thematically organized examination of the 20th-century British novel, with emphasis on impressionism; the revolt against naturalism; the experimental novel; the anti-modernist reaction: Conrad, Joyce, Woolf, Lawrence, Drabble, Rhys.
ENL 156
The Short Story
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y.
The short story as a genre; its historical development, techniques, and formal character as a literary form. European as well as American writers.
ENL 157
Detective Fiction
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y.
Historically, formally, and thematically focused study of novels and short stories in the detective fiction genre.
ENL 158A
The American Novel to 1900 
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Or the equivalent.
Historically or thematically organized examination of the rise and development of the American novel from its beginnings; Hawthorne,Melville, Twain, James, and others.
ENL 158B
The American Novel from 1900 to the Present
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Or the equivalent.
Historically or thematically organized examination of important American novelists from 1900 to the present: authors may include Willa Cather, Nathanael West, William Faulkner, Ralph Ellison, Zora Neale Hurston, Thomas Pynchon, Ishmael Reed, Maria Helena Viramontes, Rachel Kushner, and others.
ENL 159
Topics in the Novel
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y.
Examination of major novels arranged thematically. Topics might include Bildungsroman, stream-of-consciousness novel, Gothic novel, historical novel.
ENL 160
Film as Narrative
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y.
Study of modern film (1930 to present) as a storytelling medium.
ENL 161A
Film History I: Origins to 1945
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y.
Cultural and aesthetic history of film making from its origins in the 1890's through 1945. ENL 161A & ENL 161B need not be taken in sequence.
ENL 161B
Film History II: 1945 to present
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y.
Cultural and aesthetic history of film making from its origins in the 1890's through 1945. ENL 161A & ENL 161B need not be taken in sequence.
ENL 162
Film Theory & Criticism
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y.
Film theory and criticism, with a study of ten major works of international film art.
ENL 163
Literary Study in the British Isles
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y.Enrollment by application only through the Education Abroad Center.
Literary Study in the British Isles: On-site study of the literature, film, and/or performance of the British Isles. Taught abroad.
ENL 164
Writing Science
ENL 003;  STS 001;  Or equivalent.
Texts and writing practices in the production of scientific knowledge.  Surveys the literary structure of scientific arguments; history of scientific genres; rhetoric and semiotics in scientific culture; graphical systems in the experimental laboratory; narratives of science, including science fiction. 
ENL 165
Topics in Poetry
(ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y);  ENL 045.
Intensive examination of various topics expressed in poetry from all periods of English and American literature. 
ENL 166
Love & Desire in Contemporary American Poetry
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y.
Close reading of contemporary American poems on the theme of love and desire by poets of diverse ethnicities and of gay, lesbian, and heterosexual orientations.
ENL 167
20th-Century African American Poetry
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V;  UWP 001Y;  Or the equivalent.
African American poetry in the 20th-century, including oral and literary traditions. Authors covered may include Gwendolyn Brooks, Countee Cullen, Robert Hayden, and Langston Hughes.
ENL 168
20th-Century American Poetry
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Or the equivalent.
Historical Study of American poetry since 1900, with thematic and formal focus at the instructor's discretion.  
ENL 171A
The Bible as Literature: The Old Testament
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y.
Selected readings from the Old Testament illustrating various literary forms. Emphasis on the Pentateuch, the Historical Books, and the Wisdom Books. May be taken independently of ENL 171B.
ENL 171B
The Bible as Literature: Prophets & New Testament
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y.
Selected readings from the Old Testament prophets and the New Testament. May be taken independently of ENL 171A. 
ENL 172
Video Games & Culture
TCS 001 or STS 001 or ENL 003;  Or equivalent of any.
Critical approaches to the study of video games, focusing on formal, historical, and cultural modes of analysis. History of software and hardware in North American and global contexts. Relations of games to society, politics, economics, literature, media, and the arts.
ENL 173
Science Fiction
ENL 003 or STS 001;  Or equivalent.
Literary modes and methods of science fiction. Representative texts, authors, and themes of the genree.g., time travel, alternative universes, and utopias. Relations of science fiction to science, philosophy, and culture.
ENL 175
American Literary Humor
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Or standing above freshman level.
American humorous vision of man, nature, and the supernatural. Includes one or more of the following: colonial humor; southwestern and New England humor; pre- and post-Civil War masters; local colorists; journalistic gadflies; anti-provincialists; modernist poets and prose writers; black humor.
ENL 177
Study of an Individual Author
ENL 110A or ENL 110B.
In-depth study of an author's works; historical context; relation to predecessors and contemporaries; critical reception; influence.
ENL 178
Topics in Nations, Regions, & Other Cultural Geographies
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Or equivalent.
Literary productions of a local, regional, national, transnational, or other geographical formation; e.g., the global South; literature of Hawaii; literature of Australia.
ENL 179
Multi-Ethnic Literature of the United States
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Or standing above freshman level.
Writings by American authors of diverse races and ethinicities (African American, Asian, Jewish, Latin American, Native American, and mixed ancestry) clarifying the roles of story-telling and cultural heritage in constructing identity, experiencing displacement, recovering history, and cultivating an inclusive society.
ENL 180
Children's Literature
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y.
Historical backgrounds and development of types of children's literature, folklore and oral tradition, levels of interest, criticism and evaluation, illustration and bibliography.
ENL 181A
African American Literature to 1900
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y.
African American literature from the colonial period to 1900. Particular attention to the rapid development of the African American literary culture from a primarily oral tradition to various literary genres, including the slave narrative.
ENL 181B
African American Literature 1900-Present
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y.
Major African American writers in the context of cultural history from 1900 to the present. Writers may include Richard Wright, Ann Petry, James Baldwin, Ralph Ellison, Paule Marshall, Toni Morrison, Alice Walker, Clarence Major.
ENL 182
Literature of California
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y.
Focus is on the diverse contributions to the rise of California literature. Reading of poetry, fiction, and essays. Emphasis on 19th- and 20th-century naturalists, turn of the century novelists, the Beats, and writers of the last two decades.
ENL 183
Young Adult Literature
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Or equivalent.
Theoretical, critical, and literary issues informing the study and teaching of American young adult literature.
ENL 184
Literature & the Environment
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y.
Historical and/or thematic survey of topics in writing about the environment.
ENL 185A
Women's Writing I
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y.
Women's Writing in English before 1800; organized by period, place, genre, or theme.
ENL 185B
Women's Writing II
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y.
Women's Writing in English from 1800 to 1900; organized by period, place, genre, or theme.
ENL 185C
Women's Writing III
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y.
Women's Writing in English after 1900; organized by period, place, genre, or theme.
ENL 186
Literature, Sexuality, & Gender
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Or the equivalent.
Historically or thematically focused intensive examinations of gender and sexuality in British and American literature. 
ENL 187A
Topics in Literature & Media
ENL 110A or ENL 110B;  and Consent of Instructor.
Group study of a topic centered on the relationships between literature and film or other moving-image media.
ENL 188A
Topics in Literary & Critical Theory
ENL 110A or ENL 110B;  and Consent of Instructor.
Intensive examination of theories addressing a particular problem, topic, or question.
ENL 189
Seminar in Literary Studies
ENL 110A or ENL 110B.
Intensive, focused study of literature at an advanced level. May be organized by topic, author, period, movement, or genre. High participation.
ENL 192
Internship in English
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y.
Internships in fields where students can practice their skills. A maximum of 4 units is allowed toward the major in English. May be taught abroad.
ENL 194H
Seminar for Honors Students
ENL 110A or ENL 110B;  One advanced study course; admission to English Department Senior Honors Program in Literature, Criticism, and Theory.Limited enrollment.
Preparation for writing an honors thesis in ENL 195H. High level of participation expected.
ENL 195H
Honors Thesis
ENL 194H.
Preparation of a thesis, under the supervision of an instructor. Students satisfying requirements for the general major or the teaching emphasis write on a scholarly or critical subject; creative writing students submit a volume of poems or fiction.
ENL 197T
Tutoring in English
Upper division standing and consent of Chairperson.
Leading of small voluntary discussion groups designed to develop reading and writing skills and affiliated with one of the university's regular courses. 
ENL 197TC
Community Tutoring in English
Upper division standing and a major in English; consent of Chairperson.
Field experience, with individuals or in classroom in instruction of English language, literature, and composition. Does not fulfill requirement for major. 
ENL 198
Directed Group Study
ENL 003 or ENL 005F or ENL 005P or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.
ENL 198F
Student Facilitated Course
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Consent of Instructor.
Student facilitated course intended primarily for upper division students.
ENL 198S
Directed Group Study
ENL 163S (can be concurrent);  and Consent of Instructor.  ENL 163S required concurrently.
Group study closely tied to the texts and periods studied in ENL 163S. Investigations of historical sites, museums, galleries, and performances. May be taught abroad in London.
ENL 199FA
Student Facilitated Course Development
ENL 003 or UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Consent of Instructor.
Under the supervision of a faculty member, an undergraduate student plans and develops the course they will offer under 098F/198F.
ENL 200
Introduction to Graduate Studies in English
Graduate standing.
Introduction to literary scholarship with special attention to the elements of professionalism and to different modes of literary investigation.  
ENL 206
Beowulf
ENL 205;  Or the equivalent.
A study of the poem and the Heroic Age of Germanic literature. 
ENL 210
Readings in English & American Literature
Upper division course in area studied.
Content varies according to specialty of instructor.  
ENL 225
Topics in Irish Literature
Graduate standing.
Varied topics, including the 19th-century novel, contemporary Irish poetry, rise of the drama, or a study of a major author.
ENL 235
Theory of Fiction
Graduate standing.
Theories of fiction as they relate to the professional writer's practice of the craft. For students in the Creative Writing Program. 
ENL 236
Poetics
Graduate standing.
Theories of poetry as revealed in structure, prosody, and idiom of British and American poems, variably approached-through intensivestudy of a single poet, historically, or theoretically-at the instructor's discretion. For students in the Creative Writing Program. 
ENL 237
Seminar for Writers
Graduate standing.
Varied topics in the study of literature and literary culture craft and poetics from the perspective of the writer/practitioner.
ENL 238
Special Topics in Literary Theory
ENL 237;  Or the equivalent.
Advanced topics in literary theory and criticism. Preparation and evaluation of research paper. 
ENL 270
Studies in Contemporary World Literature
Graduate standing, consent of instructor, with preference given to those enrolled in the masters program in Creative Writing.
Emerging global, international or transnational techniques, theories, and individual works of contemporary world prose or poetry. Discussion, seminar reports, research papers. 
ENL 287
Topics in Literature & Media
Graduate standing.
Study of a topic centered on film or other moving-image media. Course materials to be selected by the instructor. Preparation and evaluation of research papers.
ENL 289
Article Writing Workshop
Consent of Instructor.Limited to 12 students; nomination for admission by Dissertation Director.
Training in preparing an article for publication. Participation in group discussions of article drafts.
ENL 290
Creative Writing: Special Topic
Consent of Instructor.
Writing that falls outside the generic confines of traditional genres (fiction, poetry, and nonfiction) or traditional workshop formats.  Evaluation of written materials and individual student conferences.
ENL 290F
Creative Writing: Fiction
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing, with preference given to those enrolled in master's program in Creative Writing.
Writing of prose fiction. Evaluation of written materials and individual studentconferences.
ENL 290NF
Creative Writing: Non-Fiction
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing; with preference given to those enrolled in the master's program in Creative Writing.
Writing of literary non-fiction, with emphasis on autobiography, biography, memoir, the occasional or nature essay, or other non-fiction prose narratives.
ENL 290P
Creative Writing: Poetry
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing, with preference given to those enrolled in master's program in Creative Writing.
Writing of poetry. Evaluation of written materials and individual student conferences.
ENL 391
Teaching Creative Writing
Graduate standing; appointment as Teaching Assistant in the English Department.
Designed for new instructors of ENL 005F or ENL 005P; discussion of ways to facilitate creative writing workshops and to respond to student manuscripts.
ENL 393
Teaching Literature & Composition
Graduate standing; appointment as Teaching Assistant in the English Department.
Designed for new instructors of  ENL 003 or the equivalent courses; discussion of problems related to teaching literature and composition to lower division students.
ENL 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Graduate standing.

ENM 192
Internship in Endocrinology
Upper division standing; approval of project by preceptor prior to internship.
Supervised work experience in endocrinology.
ENM 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.
Endocrinology research.
ENM 460
Endocrinology Clinical Clerkship
IMD 430;  And/or consent of instructor.Limited enrollment.
Participation with members of subspecialty service in the initial evaluation, work-up, management and follow-up of patients with endocrinologic disorders.
ENM 465
Clinical Nutrition Clerkship
IMD 430;  Consent of IOR.
In-depth experience in assessment and monitoring of nutritional support of patients whose illnesses are complicated by malnutrition and of patients with problems in under-nutrition due to various illnesses.
ENM 480
Insights in Endocrinology
Consent of Instructor.  Student in good academic standing.
First- or second-year students observe in morning Endocrine and Diabetes clinics; attend bi-weekly noon and afternoon endocrine conferences. Present brief endocrine physiology oral presentation to the endocrine group.
ENM 499
Research
Consent of Instructor.

ENT 090X
Special Topics in Entomology 
Consent of Instructor.
Freshman seminar course for indepth examination of a special topic within the subject area. 
ENT 092
Internship
Consent of Instructor.
Work-learn experience on and off campus in all subject areas offered by the department, supervised by a member of the faculty.
ENT 100
General Entomology
BIS 002B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Biology, anatomy, physiology, development, classification, ecology and relation of insects to human welfare. 
ENT 100L
General Entomology Laboratory 
ENT 100 (can be concurrent).
Anatomy, development, population ecology, methods of collecting, classification and identification of insects of all orders and of major families. 
ENT 101
Functional Insect Morphology 
ENT 100.
Study of the basic external and internal structures, organs and tissues of insects, with emphasis on functional systems. Functional anatomy, histology and fine structures of important organs and tissues will be discussed.
ENT 102
Insect Physiology  
ENT 100;  Or course in physiology or invertebrate zoology.
Processes by which insects maintain themselves, reproduce, and adapt to environment. Insects as models for basic/applied research through detailed analysis of metabolic, physiological, and behavioral processes. Emphasis on analysis of methodology, fact, and theory.
ENT 103
Insects Systematics 
Introductory course in zoology or entomology.
Principles and methods of systematics, with particular reference to insects. Emphasis on different theories of classification, and analysis of phylogenetic relationships. 
ENT 104
Behavioral Ecology of Insects 
Introductory biology or zoology.
Basic principles and mechanisms of insect behavior and ecology. An evolutionary approach to understanding behavioral ecology of insects.
ENT 105
Insect Ecology
BIS 002B (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.
Introduction to insect ecology combining fundamental concepts and questions in ecology with ideas, hypotheses and insights from insects. Integrates aspects of individual, population, community and ecosystem ecology. 
ENT 107
California Insect Diversity
An introductory course in entomology.
Survey of the diversity of insects from selected ecological zones in California with emphasis on collection, identification, and natural history. 
ENT 109
Field Taxonomy & Ecology
An introductory course in entomology or consent of instructor.
Study of insects in their natural habitats; their identification and ecology.
ENT 110
Arthropod Pest Management
BIS 001B.
Development of the ecological basis for the integrated pest management paradigm with emphasis on agriculture. Ecological and practical aspects of control tactics. Laboratory emphasizes identification of pests and beneficials of agriculture and urban situations.
ENT 110
Arthropod Pest Management
(STA 013 or STA 100 C- or better);  BIS 002B C- or better;  or Consent of Instructor.
Sustainable management & ecology of arthropod pests in agricultural systems. Techniques for effective, management of arthropod pests via in-depth knowledge about pest biology, life strategies, spatial ecology, and food web functions. Lab & field trip exercises in applied research in pest management, ecology, and evolution using digital technologies (apps, remote sensing, cloud-based decision support).
ENT 116
Freshwater Macroinvertebrates
BIS 002B;  Or equivalent.Limited enrollment.
Biology, ecology and taxonomy of freshwater macroinvertebrates, including insects, crustaceans, molluscs, worms, leeches, flatworms and others. Adaptations to life in freshwater. Aquatic food webs. Uses of macroinvertebrates in water quality monitoring. Field trips during regular lab hours. 
ENT 116L
Aquatic Insect Collection
ENT 100L or ENT 116 (can be concurrent);  Or prior experience with insect/arthropod identification to Family level.Restricted to 25 students.
Collection of aquatic insects and identification to the Family level. Collections will require two, one-day weekend field trips (by arrangement). Collection requirement is 40 Families.
ENT 117
Longevity
Upper division standing or consent of instructor.
Nature, origin, determinants, and limits of longevity with particular reference to humans; emphasis on implications of findings from non-human model systems including natural history, ecology and evolution of life span; description of basic demographic techniques including life table methods.
ENT 123
Plant-Virus-Vector Interaction
BIS 002A;  BIS 101;  PLB 105, PLP 120, and ENT 100 recommended.
Analysis of interactions necessary for viruses to infect plants.Interactions among insect vectors and host plants involved in the plant-virus life cycle. Evolutionary aspects of the molecular components in viral infection and modern approaches to the interdiction of viral movement.
ENT 135
Introduction to Biological Control
ENT 100 or ENT 110.

ENT 153
Medical Entomology
BIS 002A;  BIS 002B;  or Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing in one of the biological sciences.
Basic biology and classification of medically important arthropods with special emphasis on the ecology of arthropodborne diseases and principles of their control. Relationships of arthropods to human health. 
ENT 156
Biology of Parasitism 
BIS 002A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Lectures on the biological and ecological aspects affecting host-parasite relationships using selected examples from protozoan and metazoan fauna.
ENT 156L
Biology of Parasitism Laboratory
ENT 156 (can be concurrent);  ENT 156 required concurrently or consent of instructor.
Laboratory demonstrations using selected examples of protozoan and metazoan organisms along with various techniques used in parasitology to exemplify concepts presented in the lecture course. 
ENT 158
Forensic Entomology
ENT 100;  or Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Arthropods, their general biology, succession, developmental cycles and population biology in matters of criminal prosecution and civil litigation. Emphasis on basic arthropod biology, ecological and developmental concepts and methods, development of reasoning abilities, implication, development of opinions and evidence. 
ENT 180A
Experimental Ecology & Evolution in the Field
EVE 100 (can be concurrent);  (ENT 105 (can be concurrent) or ESP 100 (can be concurrent) or EVE 101 (can be concurrent));  Due to the unusual nature of this course, all prospective students are strongly encouraged to contact the instructor.
Experimental design in field ecology. Examination of primary literature, experimental design, independent and collaborative research, analysis of data, development of original research paper based on field experiments.
ENT 180B
Experimental Ecology & Evolution in the Field
EVE 180A or ENT 180A.
Experimental design in field ecology. Examination of primary literature, experimental design, independent and collaborative research, analysis of data, development of original research paper based on field experiments.
ENT 192
Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of 84 units.
Laboratory experience or fieldwork off and on campus in all subject areas offered in the Department of Entomology. Internships supervised by a member of the faculty.
ENT 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

ENT 212
Molecular Biology of Insects & Insect Viruses 
Consent of Instructor.
Molecular biological analysis of insect systematics, physiology, and defense mechanisms. Molecular biology of insect viruses. Baculovirus expresion vectors and post-translation modification of expressed polypeptides. Biological control of using neuropeptides and toxin genes in insect viruses. 
ENT 214
Vector-borne Infectious Diseases: Changing Patterns 
Open to graduate students, MPVM and MPH students, DVM and medical students with second- or third-year standing. Open to upper division undergraduate students with consent of instructor(s).
Vector-borne infectious diseases especially as they relate to changing patterns associated with climatic changes, trade and population movement.
ENT 225
Terrestrial Field Ecology
Introductory ecology and introductory statistics or consent of instructor.
Field course conducted over spring break and four weekends at Bodega Bay, emphasizing student projects. Ecological hypothesis testing, data gathering, analysis, and written and oral presentation of results are stressed.
ENT 230
Advanced Biological Control
Graduate or upper division standing in biological science or consent of instructor.
Principles and current issues in biological control of arthropod pests and weeds; laboratory devoted to identification and life history of the major groups of parasitic and predaceous arthropods.
ENT 253
Advanced Medical Entolomogy 
One upper division ENT course (other than ENT 153) and one course in Microbiology; ENT 153 strongly recommended.
An analysis of several anthropod-borne human diseases with emphasis on the relationships of the biology of the vector to the ecology of the disease. Discussion includes demonstration of vectors and techniques. 
ENT 291
Current Topics in Medical & Veterinary Entomology 
ENT 153.
Discussions of parasitology, ecology and epidemiology related to vectors of pathogens causing disease in humans and animals.
ENT 292
Current Topics in Insect Physiology & Behavior 
ENT 102 if topic is physiology, a course in behavior if topic is behavior, or either if topic bridges both.
Analysis of contemporary advances in insect physiology, biochemistry and/or behavior. Interpretation and description of physiological and behavioral mechanisms and functions. Application of general principles to solution of problems in the laboratory and field.
ENT 293N
Current Topics in Insect Biotechnology & Genomics 
ENT 212.
Discussion of advances in insect biotechnology, including genetic engineering and genomics.
ENT 294
Current Topics in Insect Ecology, Evolution, & Systematics 
ENT 103;  General course in ecology or evolution.
Discussions of advanced topics in ecology, evolution and systematics with emphasis on analysis of factors influencing the distribution, abundance, adaptations and evolutionary relationships of insects. Includes consideration of applications of basic theory; e.g. biological control.
ENT 295
Current Topics in Agricultural Entomology & Bee Biology
ENT 110 if topic relates to pests and beneficial predators; ENT 119 if topic is bee biology; either if topic bridges both.
Discussion of advanced topics about the biology, ecology, behavior, and management of pest and beneficial insects.
ENV 200A
Analysis of Environmental Management & Policy
Graduate standing.
Introduction to rational decision making for public policy problems. Modeling natural/human system interactions, data gathering and hypothesis testing. Predicting outcomes of policy options.
ENV 200B
Environmental Policy Evaluation
(STA 108 or ARE 106);  ARE 176;  Intermediate microeconomics (e.g., ECN 100); policy analysis (e.g., ESP 168A or the equivalent).
Method and practice, philosophical basis, and political role of policy analysis. Reviews basic concepts from economic theory; how and why environmental problems emerge in a market economy; and tools necessary for solving environmental problems. 
ENV 200C
Environmental Policy Process
Course in public policy (e.g., ESP 160); environmental law (e.g., ESP 161); course in statistics (e.g., SOC 106 or ARE 106).
Introduction to selected theories of the policy process and applications to the field of environmental policy. Develops critical reading skills, understanding of policy theory, and an ability to apply multiple theories to the same phenomena.
ENV 201
Environmental Law
Graduate standing.
Roles of legislatures, agencies, and courts in creating and interpreting law; legal strategies for addressing environmental problems; major environmental statutes; and the relationship between federal and state/local legal authority.
ENV 203
Environmental Policy Clinic
Graduate standing.
Teams of students analyze an environmental policy problem from scientific, legal, and economic perspectives. Hands-on learning partnering with rotating clients.
ENV 292
Graduate Internship
Consent of Instructor.
Individually designed supervised internship, off campus, in community or institutional setting. Developed with advice of faculty mentor. 
ENV 296
Environmental Policy & Management Practicum
Consent of Instructor.
Practicum experience integrating coursework into an applied professional setting.
ENV 297
Professional Development Seminar
Graduate standing.
Weekly seminar inviting policy and management professionals to come and discuss their challenges and achievements.
ENV 297
Professional Development Seminar
Graduate standing.
Weekly seminar inviting policy and management professionals to come and discuss their challenges and achievements.
EPI 202
Quantitative Epidemiology I: Probability
((MAT 016A,  MAT 016B) or (MAT 017A,  MAT 017B) or (MAT 021A,  MAT 021B));  STA 102;  STA 108;  or PHR 402 & PHR 403 or equivalent of any listed course; concurrent or previous enrollment in a basic epidemiology course (e.g., EPI 205).
Foundations in probability for epidemiologists. Emphasis on properties of and relationships between distributions and application of probability concepts to epidemiology. Includes a mathematical skills laboratory to assist in solution of epidemiologic problems.
EPI 203
Quantitative Epidemiology II: Statistical Inference
(EPI 202 or STA 130A or STA 131A or STA 133);  EPI 205;  A basic epidemiology course (EPI 205 or equivalent).
Provides the mathematical statistics foundation for statistical models, methods, and data analysis.
EPI 204
Quantitative Epidemiology III: Statistical Models
(EPI 203 or STA 130B or STA 131B or STA 133);  EPI 205;  STA 108 recommended; a basic epidemiology course (EPI 205 or equivalent); consent of instructor.
Introduces statistical models, methods, and data analysis in the areas of generalized linear model and survival analysis methodology.
EPI 204A
Foundation of Statistical Models, Methods, & Data Analysis for Scientists
STA 130A or STA 131A or STA 133;  EPI 228 recommended.
Provides the mathematical statistics foundation for statistical models, methods, and data analysis.
EPI 204B
Statistical Models, Methods, & Data Analysis for Scientists
EPI 204A;  STA 108 recommended.
Introduces statistical models, methods, and data analysis in the areas of generalized linear, survival, and correlated data methodology.
EPI 205
Principles of Epidemiology
MPM 202;  or Consent of Instructor.  An introductory statistics course.
Basic epidemiologic concepts and approaches to epidemiologic research, with examples from veterinary and human medicine, including outbreak investigation, infectious disease epidemiology, properties of tests, and an introduction to epidemiologic study design and surveillance.
EPI 206
Epidemiologic Study Design
EPI 205;  or Consent of Instructor.
Builds on concepts presented in EPI 205. Concepts of epidemiologic study designclinical trials, observational cohort studies, case control studiesintroduced in EPI 205A are covered in more depth, using a problem-based format. Discussion of published epidemiologic studies.
EPI 207
Advanced Epidemiologic Methodology
EPI 206.
In-depth integration of advanced epidemiological concepts. Theory, methods, and applications for observational studies including random and systematic error, confounding, counterfactuals, causal inference, effect modification, internal and external validity, estimability, and interpretation of effect measures, and advanced study designs.
EPI 208
Analysis & Interpretation of Epidemiologic Data
EPI 204 (can be concurrent);  EPI 207;  (STA 144 or PHR 202);  And entry level skill in standard statistical software (eg. SPSS, BMDP, SAS, Stata, MinTab, S-Plus).
Application of theory and concepts of statistics and epidemiology to analysis and interpretation of data typically found in veterinary and human epidemiologic research.
EPI 220
Problems in Epidemiologic Study Design
MPM 405;  STA 102;  STA 106;  or the equivalent; MPM 406 or the equivalent; PHR 207 required concurrently.
Design and development of research protocols and funding applications for peer review. Application of research methods data collection and management and statistical analysis in research proposals. Methods of evaluating research proposals, mechanisms of funding, specifying human subjects considerations.
EPI 222
Epidemiological Modeling
MPM 405.
Techniques of model building and simulation of infectious diseases will be explored. Epidemiologic modeling philosophy, construction and validation will be emphasized.
EPI 223
Spatial Epidemiology 
EPI 205A or MPM 205.
Geographic Information Systems (GIS) and spatial statistics. Students are expected to complete a term project based on their graduate research.
EPI 225
Advanced Topics in Epidemiology Methods
EPI 205B;  EPI 206;  EPI 207;  Or equivalents, with consent of instructor.
An in-depth study of topics in epidemiology theory and methods, selected from: causal inference, confounding, study design, or other related areas, with year to year variation.  Readings are assigned and students are expected to lead discussions on them.
EPI 226
Methods for Longitudinal & Repeated Measurement Data
EPI 204;  or Consent of Instructor.
Mixed models for longitudinal data (LD)/repeated measurements; Mean and covariance models; General linear LD models; Random coefficients models; Linear mixed effects models for continuous outcome; Generalized linear mixed effects model for discrete outcome including binary, ordinal and count data.
EPI 227
Meta Analysis
A course in basic statistics or consent of instructor.
Systematic review, standard and advanced statistical methods for meta-analysis and syntheses of knowledge and evidence. Quantitative analysis of published data, primarily in aggregate form. Students demonstrate skills in study design, protocol, analysis, and results reporting through presentation of drafted first author paper.
EPI 230
Introduction to Molecular Epidemiology
EPI 205.
Overview of the modern field of molecular epidemiology. Integrates molecular biology into traditional epidemiologic research by identifying pathways, molecules and genes that influence the risk of developing disease. 
EPI 231
Infectious Disease Epidemiology
Introductory epidemiology course (e.g., EPI 205).
Infectious disease epidemiology and prevention, with emphasis on human and veterinary diseases of global health importance. Major global health epidemics and challenges of infectious diseases, by mode of transmission.
EPI 232
Advanced Data Analysis with SAS 
EPI 202;  EPI 203;  EPI 204;  or the equivalent, or Consent of Instructor.
Provide an overview of common advanced statistical methods as well as a treatment of how to use SAS to implement them. Learn the ideas of reproducible research and reporting of statistical analyses.
EPI 242
Critical Thinking in Epidemiology
EPI 205 B or better;  EPI 206 B or better;  EPI 207 (can be concurrent).Open to Epidemiology Graduate Group students or advanced medical students only; limited to 15 students.
Critical thinking in Epidemiology.
EPI 251
Environmental Epidemiology
MPM 405 (can be concurrent);  Upper division undergraduates who have completed EST 126; or the equivalent.
Examination of the human health effects and the risk of disease from community, occupational, and personal exposure to toxic substances.
EPI 252
Social Epidemiology
EPI 205A;  and Consent of Instructor.
Social determinants of health; psychosocial and physiological pathways; health and social inequality; gender and racial/ethnic disparities in health; social support, social cohesion and health; social gradient in behavioral risk factors; social ecological approaches to health intervention; interventions addressing social determinants.
EPI 270
Research Methods in Occupational Epidemiology
(EPI 205A or MPM 205);  (MPM 202 or STA 102).
Methods used in epidemiologic research on occupational hazards. Topics include design and analysis of cohort and case-control studies, sample size, measuring dose, choosing a control group, validation of employment and health data, interpreting negative studies, and analysis software.
EPI 272
Cancer Epidemiology
EPI 205A;  EPI 205B;  EPI 206 (can be concurrent);  STA 102;  must have basic understanding of epidemiologic and statistical concepts covered in the listed courses.
We will cover the underlying concepts essential to understanding cancer epidemiology, such as trends in incidence and survival, epidemiologic methods used to assess cancer etiology, prevention and control, and an introduction to the cancer initiation and progression multi-stage model.
EPI 277
Mathematical Models in Epidemiology
MPM 403;  MPM 405;  and Consent of Instructor.  Although not required, students encouraged to refresh their knowledge of high school calculus and differential equations.Limited to 30 students.
Theory of epidemics and mathematical modeling concepts for infectious diseases to include discrete and continuous time models, their use to explore disease dynamics and investigate prevention and control strategies for human and veterinary infectious diseases.
EPI 280
Introduction to SAS Programming
Introductory statistics course (e.g., MPM 402, STA 102).
Introduction to SAS, an integrated software system for data retrieval and management, data manipulation and programming.
ESM 092
Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.
Work experience off and on campus in resource sciences. Internship supervised by a member of the faculty.
ESM 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Primarily for lower division students.
ESM 098F
Student Facilitated Course Development
Consent of Instructor.
Student-facilitated (taught) course intended for lower division students.
ESM 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

ESM 100
Principles of Hydrologic Science
CHE 002B;  MAT 016B;  (PHY 007A or PHY 009A).Not open to students who have successfully completed ERS 100. (Formerly ERS 100.)
Topics include hydrology (surface and ground water), hydraulic flow through porous media, water in the soil-plant-atmosphere continuum, water quality, flow through open channels, and representative water-resource problems.
ESM 108
Environmental Monitoring
EVE 101;  ESP 100;  ETX 101;  WFC 100;  ERS 100;  SSC 100;  ENH 100;  LDA 050;  Or the equivalent for any of theses courses.Not open to students who have successfully completed ERS 108. (Formerly ERS 108.)
Instrumentation and methods for environmental and ecological monitoring; GPS, sensors, datalogging, and GIS. Wide range of measurement techniques for environmental parameters. 
ESM 118
Evapotranspiration Principles, Measurement & Modeling
HYD 124 C or better;  Consent of Instructor.
Estimation of evapotranspiration (ET) for irrigation management and water resources planning; including the basic principles and key factors controlling evaporation and ET rates, methods of measuring these factors in the field and remotely, and determination of likely water requirements for crops and various landscape conditions as needed for water resources planning.  
ESM 120
Global Environmental Interactions
One college level chemistry course; one college level biology course.Limited to 25 students per discussion section; not open to students who have successfully completed ERS 060 or 120. (Formerly ERS 060 & 120.)
Relationships among climate, hydrology, biogeochemical cycles, soils and vegetation distribution in diverse landscapes and biomes. Emphasis on physical, chemical, and biological processes affecting ecosystems from the poles to the equator, and human impacts on the environment.
ESM 121
Water Science & Management
PHY 010 or GEL 001.Not open to students who have successfully completed ERS 121. (Formerly ERS 121.)
Role of water as an essential natural resource in contemporary society. Aspects of the scientific method, including descriptions of natural phenomena and underlying physical causes. Water for cities, agriculture, industry, wildlife and recreation; case studies of water management.
ESM 131
Air as a Resource
(CHE 010 or CHE 002A);  CHE 002B.Not open to students who have successfully completed ERS 131. (Formerly ERS 131.)
Degradation of the atmospheric resource, historical aspects and effects of air pollution examined. Evaluation of primary gaseous and particulate pollutants and discussion of their impact.
ESM 141
Role of Fire in Natural Ecosystems
(BIS 002A or PLS 002);  (BIS 002B or BIS 002C);  Basic biological, ecology/evolution concepts.Not open to students who have successfully completed ERS 141. (Formerly ERS 141.)
Fire regimes and roles in major North American vegetation types, especially in the west. Physics of fire, fire effects on organisms and ecosystem functioning, reconstructing fire histories, fire in resource management, and fire use by indigenous people. 
ESM 144
Trees & Forests
PLS 002 or BIS 001C or BIS 002C.
Biological structure and function of trees as organisms; understanding of forests as communities and as ecosystems; use of forests by humans; tree phenology, photosynthesis, respiration, soil processes, life histories, dormancy, forest biodiversity, and agroforestry.
ESM 185
Aerial Photo Interpretation & Remote Sensing
Upper division standing.Not open to students who have successfully completed ERS 185. (Formerly ERS 185.)
Basics of remote sensing and photogrammetry, grids and map projections, aerial photo interpretation, sensors and platforms for aerial and space photography and non-photographic imaging systems, aerial thermography, microwave sensing, and introduction to remote sensing applications.
ESM 186
Environmental Remote Sensing
MAT 016B;  (PHY 007C or PHY 009B);  Upper division standing; LDA 150 recommended.Not open to students who have successfully completed HYD 186 or ERS 186. (Formerly HYD 186 & formerly ERS 186.)
Overview of satellite, airborne, and ground-based remote sensing, building on properties of electromagnetic radiation. Applications include hydrologic processes, weather and climate, ecology and land use, soils, geology, forestry, and agriculture. Computer based analysis and visualization of images and processing techniques.
ESM 192
Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of 84 units.
Work experience off and on campus in resource sciences. Internship supervised by a member of the faculty.
ESM 194H
Senior Honor Thesis
Senior standing, overall GPA of 3.50 or higher and consent of master advisor.
Independent study, guided research on an environmentally related subject of special interest to the student. 
ESM 195
Integrating Environmental Science & Management
Consent of Instructor.  Senior status in Environmental Science & Management major or other environmental science major (e.g. Environmental Resource Science; Environmental Biology & Management; Environmental Toxicology; Environmental Policy Analysis & Planning; Wildlife, Fish, & Conservation Biology; Hydrologic Science).
Practical aspects of environmental improvement through integrated analyses of contemporary issues or problems associated with advocacy, regulation, science and resource management from the perspectives of the physical and ecological sciences and current policy/management. 
ESM 198F
Student Facilitated Course
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to upper division standing or consent of instructor.
Student-facilitated (taught) course intended for upper division students.
ESM 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

ESM 199FA
Student Teaching Course Development
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to upper division standing.
Under the supervision of a faculty member, an undergraduate student plans and develops the course they will teach under 098F/198F.
ESM 199FB
Student Teaching Course Development
Consent of Instructor.
Student facilitated. Under the supervision of a faculty member, an undergraduate student teaches a course under 098F/198F.
ESP 001
Environmental Analysis
UWP 001 (can be concurrent) or UWP 001Y (can be concurrent) or UWP 001V (can be concurrent) or ENL 003 (can be concurrent);  Or equivalent; sophomore standing; ECN 001A and BIS 002B recommended.
Analysis of the physical, biological, and social interactions which constitute environmental problems. Emphasis on analysis of environmental problems, the consequences of proposed solutions, and the interaction of environmental science and public policy in creating solutions. 
ESP 010
Current Issues in the Environment
Elementary biology recommended.
Science behind environmental issues, and policies affecting our ability to solve domestic and international environmental problems. Resources, environmental quality, regulation, environmental perception and conservation. Integrative case studies.
ESP 092
Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.
Work experience off and on campus in all subject areas offered in the College of Agricultural & Environmental Sciences. Internship supervised by member of the faculty.
ESP 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Primarily for lower division students.
ESP 100
General Ecology
(BIS 002A,  BIS 002B,  BIS 002C);  ((MAT 016A,  MAT 016B) or (MAT 017A,  MAT 017B) or (MAT 021A,  MAT 021B));  STA 013 recommended.
Theoretical and experimental analysis of the distribution, growth andregulation of species populations; predator-prey and competitive interactions; and the organization of natural communities. Application of evolutionary and ecological principles to selected environmental problems.
ESP 100
General Ecology
(BIS 002A,  BIS 002B,  BIS 002C);  (MAT 016A or MAT 017A or MAT 021A);  (MAT 016B or MAT 017B or MAT 021B);  STA 013 recommended.
Theoretical & experimental analysis of the distribution, growth & regulation of species populations; predator-prey & competitive interactions; and the organization of natural communities. Application of evolutionary & ecological principles to selected environmental problems.
ESP 101
Ecology, Nature, & Society
ANT 001 or ANT 002 or ESP 030 or EVE 100 or BIS 101 recommended.
Interdisciplinary study of diversity and change in human societies, using frameworks from anthropology, evolutionary ecology, history, archaeology, psychology, and other fields. Topics include population dynamics, subsistence transitions, family organization, disease, economics, warfare, politics, and resource conservation.
ESP 110
Principles of Environmental Science
(PHY 001A or PHY 007A);  (MAT 016B or MAT 017B or MAT 021B);  BIS 002A or BIS 010 recommended; upper division standing.
Application of physical and chemical principles, ecological concepts, and systems approach to policy analysis of atmospheric environments, freshwater and marine environments, land use, energy supplies and technology, and other resources.
ESP 111
Marine Environmental Issues
Consent of Instructor.
Examination of critical environmental issues occurring in coastal waters including the effects of climate change, overfishing, and other human impacts. Through readings and group discussions, students will develop an integrative understanding of the oceanographic and ecological processes.
ESP 116N
Oceanography
GEL 001 or GEL 002 or GEL 016 or GEL 050.
Advanced oceanographic topics: Chemical, physical, geological, and biological processes; research methods and data analysis; marine resources, anthropogenic impacts, and climate change; integrated earth/ocean/atmosphere systems; weekly lab and one weekend field trip.
ESP 121
Population Ecology
BIS 002A;  BIS 002B;  BIS 002C;  (MAT 016B or MAT 017B or MAT 021B or MAT 021BH).
Development of exponential and logistic growth models for plant and animal populations, analysis of age structure and genetic structure, analysis of competition and predator-prey systems. Emphasis is on developing models and using them to make predictions and solve problems.
ESP 121
Population Ecology
BIS 002B;  (MAT 016B or MAT 017B or MAT 021B or MAT 021BH).
Development of exponential and logistic growth models for plant and animal populations, analysis of age structure and genetic structure, analysis of competition and predator-prey systems. Emphasis is on developing models and using them to make predictions and solve problems.
ESP 123
Introduction to Field & Laboratory Methods in Ecology
(ESP 100 or EVE 101);  STA 100;  Or equivalent of EVE 101 and STA 100.
Introduces students to methods used for collecting ecological data in field and laboratory situations. Methods used by population ecologists and community ecologists; emphasis on experimental design, scientific writing and data analysis.
ESP 124
Marine & Coastal Field Ecology
Upper division standing or consent of instructor. Introductory animal biology (BIS 001B) recommended; residence at or near Bodega Marine Lab required.Enrollment restricted to application at http://www.bml.ucdavis.edu.
Ecology of marine populations and communities living in diverse habitats along the California coast. Hands-on learning using scientific process and tools of the biological trade to address ecological questions arising during field trips. Critical thinking through discussing scientific literature.
ESP 127
Plant Conservation Biology
ESP 100 or EVE 101;  Or equivalent upper division general ecology.
Principles governing the conservation of plant species and plant communities, including the roles of fire, exotic species, grazing, pollination, soils, and population genetics; analytic and practical techniques for plant conservation; and introduction to relevant legal, ethical, and policy issues.
ESP 150A
Physical and Chemical Oceanography
(ESP 116N or GEL 116N);  PHY 009B;  MAT 021D;  CHE 002C;  and Consent of Instructor.
Physical and chemical properties of seawater, fluid dynamics, air-sea interaction, currents, waves, tides, mixing, major oceanic geochemicalcycles.
ESP 150A
Physical & Chemical Oceanography
(ESP 116N or GEL 116N);  (PHY 007B or PHY 009B);  (MAT 016C or MAT 017C or MAT 021C);  (CHE 002C or GEL 055);  and Consent of Instructor.
Physical and chemical properties of seawater, fluid dynamics, air-sea interaction, currents, waves, tides, mixing, major oceanic geochemical cycles.
ESP 150B
Geological Oceanography
GEL 050 or (GEL 116N or ESP 116N).
Introduction to the origin and geologic evolution of ocean basins. Composition and structure of oceanic crust; marine volcanism; and deposition of marine sediments. Interpretation of geologic history of the ocean floor in terms of sea-floor spreading theory.
ESP 150C
Biological Oceanography
BIS 002A;  Consent of Instructor.  A course in general ecology.
Ecology of major marine habitats, including intertidal, shelf benthic, deep-sea and plankton communities. Existing knowledge and contemporary issues in research. Segment devoted to human use. One weekend field trip required.
ESP 151
Limnology
BIS 002A;  BIS 002B;  (BIS 002C and ESP 100 or EVE 101 recommended.).
Biology and productivity of inland waters with emphasis on the physical and chemical environment.
ESP 151L
Limnology Laboratory
ESP 151 (can be concurrent);  Junior, senior, or graduate standing.
Limnological studies of lakes, streams, and reservoirs with interpretation of aquatic ecology.
ESP 152
Coastal Oceanography
Upper division standing or consent of the instructor; physics (PHY 009B), calculus (MAT 021B) and exposure to physical and chemical oceanography (GEL 150A and ESP 150A) are recommended; residence at or near Bodega Marine Laboratory required.Enrollment restricted to application at http://www.bml.ucdavis.edu.
Oceanography of coastal waters, including bays, river plumes, nearshore and estuaries; focus on transport patterns, how they are forced and implications for ecological and environmental problems. Pertinent for students in oceanography, ecology, environmental engineering, geology and hydrology.
ESP 155
Wetland Ecology
BIS 002A;  Or equivalent of BIS 002A; ESP 100 or EVE 101 recommended.
Introduction to wetland ecology. The structure and function of major wetland types and principles that are common to wetlands and that distinguish them from terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems.
ESP 155L
Wetland Ecology Laboratory
ESP 155 (can be concurrent).
Modern and classic techniques in wetland field ecology. Emphasis on sampling procedures, vegetation analysis, laboratory analytical procedures, and examples of successful wetland restoration techniques.
ESP 160
The Policy Process
POL 001;  ECN 001A and STA 013 recommended.
Alternative models of public policymaking and application to case studies in the U.S. and California. 
ESP 161
Environmental Law
Upper division standing and one course in environmental science or political science recommended.
Introduction for non-Law School students to some of the principal issues in environmental law and the judicial interpretation of some important environmental statutes, e.g., NEPA.
ESP 161
Environmental Law
Upper division standing; one course in environmental science or political science recommended.
Introduction for non-Law School students to some of the principal issues in environmental law and the judicial interpretation of some important environmental statutes, e.g., NEPA.
ESP 162
Environmental Policy
ECN 001A or ECN 001AV.
Compares economic with socio-cultural approaches to understanding the causes of environmental problems and strategies for addressing them.  Includes different approaches to the policy process, policy instruments, and environmental behavior. Applies these principles to several problems. 
ESP 163
Energy & Environmental Aspects of Transportation
ECN 001A or ECN 001AV or ENG 106.
Engineering, economic, and systems planning concepts. Analysis and evaluation of energy, air quality and selected environmental attributes of transportation technologies. Strategies for reducing pollution and petroleum consumption in light of institutional and political constraints. Evaluation of vehicle emission models.
ESP 165
Climate Policy
ESP 001 or ECN 001A or ECN 001AV;  or Consent of Instructor.
Models, data and assumptions behind competing arguments regarding societal response to the prospect of climate change at the state, national and international level from economic, ethical and policy science perspectives.
ESP 166
Ocean & Coastal Policy
ESP 001;  or Consent of Instructor.Limited enrollment.
Overview of U.S. and International ocean and coastal policy, including energy, coastal land-use and water quality, protected areas and species.
ESP 167
Energy Policy
(ECN 001A or ECN 001AV);  (MAT 016B or MAT 017B or MAT 021B);  or Consent of Instructor.
Survey of primary energy resources (fossil, renewable, nuclear), energy conversion methods, future energy demand scenarios, and environmental impacts of energy. Overview of energy policy in the U.S. Analysis of policy alternatives for addressing energy-related environmental and national security issues.
ESP 168A
Methods of Environmental Policy Evaluation
(ESP 001 or ESP 010);  (STA 013 or STA 013Y or STA 100);  (ECN 001A or ECN 001AV);  ECN 100 recommended.
Evaluation of alternatives for solution of complex environmental problems; impact analysis, benefitcost analysis, distributional analysis, decision making under uncertainty, and multi-objective evaluation.
ESP 168B
Methods of Environmental Policy Analysis
ESP 168A.
Continuation of ESP 168A. Emphasis on examination of the literature for applications of research & evaluation techniques to problems of transportation, air & water pollution, land use, and energy policy. 
ESP 169
Water Policy & Politics
ECN 001A or POL 001 recommended.
Governance of water, including issues of water pollution/quality and water supply. Politics of water decision-making and effectiveness of water policy. Broad focus on federal water policy, with case examples from nationally significant U.S. watersheds.
ESP 170
Conservation Biology Policy
One course in environmental science (e.g., ESP 001), conservation (e.g., WFC 011 or WFC 154), or government (e.g., POL 001) recommended.
Analysis of policies designed to conserve species and their habitats. Emphasis on how individual incentives affect the success of conservation policies. Valuation of endangered species and biodiversity. Criteria for deciding conservation priorities.
ESP 171
Urban & Regional Planning
ESP 001 recommended.
How cities plan for growth in ways that minimize environmental harm. Standard city planning tools (general plan, zoning ordinance) and innovative new approaches. Focus on planning requirements and practices in California. Relationships between local, regional, state, and federal policy.
ESP 172
Public Lands Management
POL 001 and ECN 001A recommended.
Investigation of alternative approaches to public lands management by Federal and state agencies. Role each agency's legislation plays in determining the range of resource allocations.
ESP 173
Land Use & Growth Controls
Upper division standing; one course in environmental policy.
Exposes students to the economic, political, and legal factors affecting land use and growth controls, and helps students critically evaluate written materials in terms of their arguments and supporting data. May be taught abroad.
ESP 175
Natural Resource Economics
ARE 100A C- or better or ECN 100A C- or better or ECN 100 C- or better.Pass One open to Managerial Economics (AMGE), Environmental Policy Analysis & Planning (AEPP) Majors, Agricultural & Resource Economics (GARE) Graduate Majors.
Economic concepts and policy issues associated with natural resources, renewable resources (ground water, forests, fisheries, and wildlife populations) and non-renewable resources (minerals and energy resources, soil).
ESP 178
Applied Research Methods
STA 103 or STA 100 or STA 108 or SOC 106 or ARE 106;  Or the equivalent.
Research methods for analysis of urban and regional land use, transportation, and environmental problems. Survey research and other data collection techniques; demographic analysis; basic forecasting, air quality, and transportation models. Collection, interpretation, and critical evaluation of data.
ESP 179
Environmental Impact Assessment
ESP 001;  Or the equivalent.
Introduction to the information resources and methods typically used in environmental impact analysis. Emphasis on how environmental information is applied to planning, environmental regulation, and public policymaking, with case studies from California land use and natural resource policy. 
ESP 179L
Environmental Impact Reporting Using Geographic Information
ESP 179 (can be concurrent);  ESP 179 required concurrently.
Introduction to Geographic Information Systems (GIS) by using ArcView for assessment and environmental planning.
ESP 190
Workshops on Environmental Problems
Consent of Instructor.Open to all upper division and graduate students on application.
Workshops featuring empirical analyses of contemporary environmental problems by multidisciplinary student teams. Guided by faculty and lay professionals, the teams seek to develop an integrated view of a problem and outline a series of alternative solutions. 
ESP 191A
Workshop on Food System Sustainability
PLS 015;  CRD 020;  ARE 121;  PLS 150;  or Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.Priority enrollment for seniors in the sustainable agriculture and food systems major; limited to 25 students per section.
First in a two-quarter senior capstone course sequence. Identify projects addressing specific problems and opportunities of sustainable agriculture and food systems, form multidisciplinary teams, and identify and consult with key stakeholders to understand their needs and concerns.
ESP 191B
Workshop on Food System Sustainability
ESP 191A.Priority enrollment for seniors in the sustainable agriculture and food systems major; limited to 25 students per section.
Continuation of ESP 191A. Teams conduct analyses of a specific issue in sustainable agriculture or food systems, prepare a critical assessment of technological, economic, environmental, and social dimensions of options for action and present their results to stakeholders.
ESP 192
Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of 84 units.
Work experience off and on campus in all subject areas offered in theCollege of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences. Internships supervised by a member of the faculty.
ESP 197T
Tutoring in Environmental Science & Policy
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Experience in teaching under guidance of faculty member.
ESP 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

ESP 212A
Environmental Policy Process
Course in public policy (e.g., ESP 160); environmental law (e.g., ESP 161); course in statistics (e.g., SOC 106 or ARE 106).
Introduction to selected theories of the policy process and applications to the field of environmental policy. Develops critical reading skills, understanding of policy theory, and an ability to apply multiple theories to the same phenomena.
ESP 212B
Environmental Policy Evaluation
(STA 108 or ARE 106);  ARE 176;  Intermediate microeconomics (e.g., ECN 100); policy analysis (e.g., ESP 168A or the equivalent).
Method and practice, philosophical basis, and political role of policy analysis. Reviews basic concepts from economic theory; how and why environmental problems emerge in a market economy; and tools necessary for solving environmental problems.
ESP 220
Tropical Ecology
ESP 100;  EVE 101;  EVE 117;  EVE 138 recommended.
Open to graduate and undergraduate students who meet requirementstressed.
ESP 228
Advanced Simulation Modeling
(STA 108 or ARE 106);  (ESP 128 and ESP 128L).
Advanced techniques in simulation modeling; optimization and simulation, dynamic parameter estimation, linear models, error propagation, and sensitivity testing. Latter half of course introduces model evaluation in ecological and social system models.
ESP 275
Economic Analysis of Resource & Environmental Policies
ARE 204 or ECN 204.
Development of externality theory, market failure concepts, welfare economics, theory of renewable and non-renewable resource use, and political economic models. Applications to policy issues regarding the agricultural/environment interface and managing resources in the public domain.
ESP 278
Research Methods in Environmental Policy
ARE 106;  Or the equivalent.
Introduction to scientific research in environmental policy.Major issues in the philosophy of the social sciences.How to design research that acknowledges theoretical assumptions and that is likely to produceevidence in an intersubjectively reliable fashion with explicit recognition of its uncertainties.
ESP 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

ESP 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students only.
Teaching assistant training practicum.
ETX 092
Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.
Work experience off and on campus in all subject areas offered in the College of Agricultural & Environmental Sciences. Internships supervised by a member of the faculty.
ETX 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

ETX 101
Principles of Environmental Toxicology
(CHE 008B or CHE 118B or CHE 128B);  BIS 001A.
Principles of toxicology with a focus on environmental, industrial, and natural chemicals.  Topics include fate and effects of chemicals in organisms and the environment, air pollutants, insecticides, aquatic toxicology, endocrine disruptors, biomarkers and bioassays, and risk assessment.
ETX 102A
Environmental Fate of Toxicants
CHE 008B;  CHE 118B;  CHE 128B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Properties of toxic chemicals influencing their distribution and transformations; action of environmental forces affecting toxicant breakdown, movement, and accumulation; sources and occurrence of major classes of environmental toxicants.
ETX 102A
Environmental Fate of Toxicants
CHE 008B or CHE 118B or CHE 128B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Properties of toxic chemicals influencing their distribution and transformations; action of environmental forces affecting toxicant breakdown, movement, and accumulation; sources and occurrence of major classes of environmental toxicants.
ETX 102B
Quantitative Analysis of Environmental Toxicants
ETX 102A.
Sample preparation methods for trace analysis of environmental toxicants. Concept and techniques of advanced analytical instrumentation. Interpretation and use of analytical data.
ETX 103A
Biological Effects of Toxicants
BIS 102;  ETX 101 and NPB 101 recommended.
Biological effects of toxic substances in living organisms.  Metabolism, cellular and tissue targets, mechanisms of action, and pathological effects.
ETX 103B
Biological Effects of Toxicants: Experimental Approaches
ETX 103A.
Experimental approaches for assessing the biological effects of toxicants.
ETX 104
Environmental & Nutritional Factors in Cellular Regulation & Nutritional Toxicants
BIS 101;  (BIS 103 or ABI 103).
Cellular regulation from nutritional/toxicological perspective. Emphasis: role of biofactors on modulation of signal transduction pathways, role of specific organelles in organization/regulation of metabolic transformations, major cofactor functions, principles of pharmacology/toxicology important to understanding nutrient/toxicant metabolism.
ETX 110
Toxic Tragedies & Their Impact on Society
BIS 010;  or Consent of Instructor.  Or equivalent; CHE 118A recommended.
Examination of toxic tragedies, their origins, consequences, and effects on toxic regulation.
ETX 111
Introduction to Mass Spectrometry
CHE 118C.
Introduction to mass spectrometry, including ionization techniques, mass analyzers, interpretation of mass spectra, and applications of mass spectrometry.  Emphasis on fundamental concepts of mass spectrometry necessary to identify and quantify organic molecules. 
ETX 111
Introduction to Mass Spectrometry
CHE 118C or CHE 128C.
Introduction to mass spectrometry, including ionization techniques, mass analyzers, interpretation of mass spectra, and applications of mass spectrometry. Emphasis on fundamental concepts of mass spectrometry necessary to identify and quantify organic molecules. 
ETX 120
Perspectives in Aquatic Toxicology
CHE 008B;  (CHE 118B or CHE 128B);  BIS 001A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Toxic substances, their fate in marine and freshwater systems, and their effects on aquatic organisms, populations, and ecosystems. Emphasis will be on substances and issues of current concern.
ETX 127
Environmental Stress & Development in Marine Organisms
ETX 101 or BIS 102 or BIS 104;  and Consent of Instructor.  Or the equivalent; ETX 114A or NUT 114 recommended.
Taught at Bodega Marine Laboratory. Effects of environmental and nutritional stress, including pollutants, on development and function in embryos and larvae of marine organisms. Emphasis on advanced experimental methods.
ETX 128
Food Toxicology
BIS 102;  BIS 103.
Chemistry and biochemistry of toxins occurring in foods, including plant and animal toxins, intentional and unintentional food additives. The assessment of food safety and toxic hazards.
ETX 130
Role & Applications of Toxicology in Modern Industry
ETX 101;  ETX 103A recommended.
Role of toxicology in industry research and development, human health and environmental protection, hazard and risk evaluations, risk management and communications, product stewardship, and regulatory compliance. Scientific principles and methods of toxicology in chemical, energy, pharmaceutical, pesticide, biotechnology industries.  
ETX 131
Environmental Toxicology of Air Pollutants
CHE 008B (can be concurrent);  Or the equivalent; BIS 102 recommended.
Field trip required. Toxicology of air pollutants in the ambient, indoor, and occupational environments.  Health effects, sources, environmental fates, pulmonary responses, sampling and analyses, and air-quality criteria and standards.  Field trip required.
ETX 135
Health Risk Assessment of Toxicants
ETX 101;  ETX 114A recommended.
Current practices of health risk assessment of environmental chemicals using toxicological principles and their application to regulatory control of these chemicals.
ETX 138
Legal Aspects of Environmental Toxicology
Consent of Instructor.  ETX 010 or ETX 101 recommended.
Federal and California legislation concerning air and water pollution, pesticide use, food and feed additives, consumer protection, and occupational exposure to toxic substances; roles of federal regulatory agencies; alternatives to government control.
ETX 140
Genes & the Environment
BIS 101;  Biological Science 101 required or permission of instructor; coursework in genetics and molecular biology and/or environmental toxicology recommended.
Evaluation of evidence that human health and disease susceptibility result from complex interactions between genes and the environment. Emphasis on cancer, metabolic, cardiovascular, and neurological health outcomes assessed by genotoxicity and toxicogenomic methods.
ETX 146
Exposure & Dose Assessment
ETX 112A;  ETX 135 recommended.
Exposure component of risk assessment; specifically, the presence and/or formation of toxic substances in environmental media, their movement within and between contaminated media, and the contacts of human populations with those media.
ETX 190
Seminar
Consent of Instructor.
Selected topics presented by students, faculty, or outside speakers covering current research and instructional activities within environmental toxicology. Reports and discussion concerning oral and written presentations, literature sources, and career opportunities.
ETX 190C
Research Group Conference
Consent of Instructor.
Weekly conference of advanced research methods and the interpretation of research results.
ETX 192
Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of 84 units.
Work experience off and on campus in all subject areas offered in theCollege of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences. Internships supervised by a member of the faculty.
ETX 194HA
Honors Research
Consent of Instructor.  Senior standing; minimum GPA of 3.250.
Specific research project conducted under the supervision of a faculty sponsor. Experience to include experimental design, learning new techniques, data analysis and interpretation of findings.
ETX 194HB
Honors Research
Consent of Instructor.  Senior standing; minimum GPA of 3.250.
Specific research project conducted under the supervision of a faculty sponsor. Experience to include experimental design, learning new techniques, data analysis and interpretation of findings.
ETX 194HC
Honors Research
Consent of Instructor.  Senior standing, minimum GPA of 3.250.
Continuation of ETX 194HA & ETA 194HB.
ETX 197T
Tutoring in Environmental Toxicology
Consent of Instructor.  Advanced standing in Environmental Toxicology, a related major, or the equivalent experience.
Teaching toxicology including conducting discussion groups for regular departmental courses under direct guidance of staff.
ETX 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

ETX 203
Environmental Toxicants
CHE 008B or CHE 128C;  and Consent of Instructor.  Or the equivalent of CHE 128C.
Toxic chemicals: selected topics illustrating their occurrence, structure, and the reactions underlying detection, toxicity, fate, andecological importance.
ETX 214
Mechanisms of Toxic Action
BIS 102;  BIS 103;  and Consent of Instructor.
Chemical, biochemical, and molecular mechanisms underlying the adverse effects of toxic chemicals. Students are required to write a grant proposal and participate in a grant review panel.
ETX 220
Analysis of Toxicants
Coursework in organic chemistry.
Principles of microanalysis of toxicants.  Theoretical considerations regarding separation, detection and quantitative determination of toxicants using chemical and instrumental techniques.
ETX 220L
Analysis of Toxicants Laboratory
ETX 220 (can be concurrent);  and Consent of Instructor.
Laboratory techniques for microanalysis of toxicants. Separation, detection, and quantitative determination of toxicants using chemical and instrumental methods.
ETX 228
Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry of Toxic Chemicals
ETX 220;  CHE 129C;  and Consent of Instructor.
Application of GC/MS techniques to investigate toxic chemicals. Massspectral fragmentations and their application to the structural elucidation. Practical application of GC/MS in current research. Preference given to environmental toxicology graduate students.
ETX 234
Current Topics in Neurotoxicology 
Core courses in one of the following graduate programs: Pharmacology & Toxicology (PTX), Agricultural & Environmental Chemistry (AGC), Biochemistry & Molecular Biology (BMB), Cell & Developmental Biology (CDB), Immunology (IMM) , Molecular Cellular & Integrative Physiology (MCP) or Neuroscience (NSC).Restricted to upper level undergraduate students must obtain permission from the course coordinator.
General principles of neurotoxicology, the cell and molecular mechanisms and health impacts of specific neurotoxicants and the contribution of neurotoxic compounds to complex eurodevelopmental disorders and neurodegenerative diseases.
ETX 240
Ecotoxicology
or Consent of Instructor.  Elementary course in toxicology and ecology or the equivalent.
Principles of toxicology as applied to chemical action on natural populations, communities, and ecosystems. Physical, chemical, and biological characteristics which influence ecotoxic effects, modeling, and field research. Selected case histories are analyzed and presented in class.
ETX 250
Reproductive Toxicology
PTX 203.
Application of toxicological principles in reproductive studies. Effects of toxicants on the male, female, and developing embryo/fetus. Criticalevaluation of reproductive toxicity studies and development of mechanistic approaches to understanding how chemical exposure can adversely affect reproduction.
ETX 260
Immunotoxicology
Undergraduate or graduate introduction to immunology coursework recommended but not required; graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Provides students with skills and knowledge for evaluating and applying research on the impact of environmental toxicants on immunological function in human and wildlife populations. 
ETX 270
Toxicology of Pesticides
ETX 101;  One course each in (a) Organic Chemistry, (b) Biochemistry, (c) Toxicology (ETX 101 or equivalent), or with consent of instructor; graduate standing.
Classification and chemical properties of pesticides, their mode of action, metabolism and disposition, pesticide resistance, effects on human health and ecological health and methods of risk benefit analyses.
ETX 278
Molecular Techniques
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Recombinant DNA technology and its applications.
ETX 280
Forensic DNA Analysis
Coursework in genetics and molecular biology.Graduate standing; consent of instructor required for all students not enrolled in the MS Forensics program.
Foundation in theory and practice of forensic DNA analysis; past, present, and emerging technologies; legal and quality assurance issues. DNA extraction, DNA quantitation, multiplex amplification of STR loci, capillary electrophoresis of amplified products, and analysis of STR typing data.
ETX 281
Principles & Practice of Forensic Serology & DNA Analysis
(FOR 278 or ETX 278) or (FOR 280 or ETX 280);  Or equivalent; consent of instructor.Restricted to students enrolled in the M.S. in Forensic Science Program or by consent of Forensic Science Program Director.
Comprehensive overview of forensic serology and DNA typing techniques and technologies. Strong emphasis on real-world applications, including preservation and tracking of biological evidence, detection and identification of bodily fluids, and methods to extract, quantify, and type human DNA.
ETX 284
Non-Human Forensic DNA; Theory & Casework Application
Consent of instructor required for all students not enrolled in the MS Forensics program; upper division Molecular Biology and Genetics or its equivalent.Restricted to graduate standing. 
Provides a comprehensive understanding of plant and animal forensic biology in terms of sample collection, preservation, analytical methods, and of the invaluable lines of inquiry these forensic evidence may permit.
ETX 290C
Advanced Research Conference
Consent of Instructor.
Presentation and critical discussion of advanced research methods and interpretation of research results. Designed primarily for graduate students.
ETX 297T
Tutoring in Environmental Toxicology
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing in Environmental Toxicology, a related major, or the equivalent experience.
Teaching toxicology including conducting discussion groups for regular departmental courses under direct guidance of staff.
ETX 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

ETX 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.

EVE 011
Principles of Ecology
Elementary biology recommended.
Ecological principles with emphasis on humans and their interactions with the environment; how humans affect and depend on natural ecosystems; the future of the Earth's biosphere.
EVE 092
Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.
Work experience off and on campus in all subject areas offered in the Department of Evolution & Ecology. Internships supervised by a member of the faculty.
EVE 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

EVE 100
Introduction to Evolution
(BIS 002A,  BIS 002B,  BIS 002C);  (MAT 016A or MAT 017A or MAT 021A);  (MAT 016B or MAT 017B or MAT 021B);  STA 100 recommended.
General survey of the origins of biological diversity and evolutionary mechanisms.
EVE 101
Introduction to Ecology
(BIS 002A,  BIS 002B,  BIS 002C);  (MAT 016A or MAT 017A or MAT 021A);  (MAT 016B or MAT 017B or MAT 021B);  Or the equivalent.
General survey of the principles of ecology.
EVE 101Q
Introduction to Computer Models in Ecology
EVE 101 (can be concurrent);  EVE 101 required concurrently.
Computational methods and mathematical models used to study ecological phenomena.
EVE 102
Population & Quantitative Genetics
BIS 101;  (STA 100 or STA 102);  EVE 100.
Evolution as caused by random mating, genetic drift, natural selection, inbreeding, migration,and mutation in theory and actuality. The resemblance between relatives and consequences of selection for quantitative traits. Application of these ideas to topics such as the evolution of sex.
EVE 103
Phylogeny, Speciation & Macroevolution
EVE 100.
Statistical inference of evolutionary patterns and processes above the species level. Topics include estimation of phylogenies and divergence times, character evolution, biogeographic history, and rates and patterns of lineage diversification, with an emphasis on the origin of species.
EVE 104
Community Ecology
EVE 101 or ESP 100.
Population growth and density dependence; predation; exploitative, interference and apparent competition; coexistence mechanisms; niches, spatial and temporal variation; stability, diversity, and productivity of food webs; applications to conservation and biological control. Emphasis on quantitative understanding through models, concepts,and empirical evidence.
EVE 105
Phylogenetic Analysis of Vertebrate Structure
(BIS 001A,  BIS 001B) or (BIS 002B,  BIS 002C).
The structure of the classes and subclasses of vertebrates is describedand interpreted in terms of phylogeny.
EVE 106
Mechanical Design in Organisms
Upper division standing or consent of instructor; introductory animal biology (BIS 001B or BIS 002B), invertebrate zoology (EVE 112), and/or ecology (EVE 101) are recommended; residence at or near Bodega Marine Lab required.Enrollment restricted to application at http://www.bml.ucdavis.edu.
Explores fundamental principles in the form and function of organisms, examining how basic properties of size, shape, structure, and habitat constrain ways in which plants and animals interact and cope with their physical surroundings.
EVE 107
Animal Communication
BIS 002B.
How animals use songs, dances, colors, chemicals, electricity and vibrations to communicate. Mechanisms of signal production and detection (sensory systems), theory of information transfer and signal design, and the role of natural selection in shaping communication.
EVE 108
Systematics & Evolution of Angiosperms
(BIS 001A,  BIS 001B,  BIS 001C) or (BIS 002A,  BIS 002B,  BIS 002C).
Diversity and classification of angiosperms (flowering plants) on a world scale, and current understanding of the origin of angiosperms and evolutionary relationships and trends within them based on morphological and molecular evidence.
EVE 109
Molecular Ecology
EVE 100.
Use of molecular tools to answer fundamental questions in ecology and evolution of natural populations. Use of DNA and protein sequences to measure diversity and natural selection within and between populations and species and application to the fields of ecology and conservation. Hands-on manipulation and analysis of data in R.
EVE 110
Running, Swimming & Flying
Upper division standing or consent of instructor; introductory animal biology (BIS 001B or BIS 002B), invertebrate zoology (EVE 112), and/or ecology (EVE 101) are recommended; residence at or near Bodega Marine Lab required.Enrollment restricted to application at http://www.bml.ucdavis.edu.
Examines the bases of organism movement in terrestrial, aquatic, and aerial environments, emphasizing both the unifying principles underlying locomotion, as well as a range of strategies employed across diverse groups of organisms.
EVE 111
Marine Environmental Issues
Consent of Instructor.
Examination of critical environmental issues occurring in coastal waters including the effects of climate change, overfishing, and other human impacts. Through readings and group discussions, students will develop an integrative understanding of the oceanographic and ecological processes.
EVE 112
Biology of Invertebrates
BIS 001B or (BIS 002B,  BIS 002C);  Courses in systematics, ecology, and evolution recommended.Limited enrollment.
Survey of the invertebrate phyla, emphasizing aquatic forms, and focusing on morphology, development, natural history, ecology, and phylogenetic relationships.
EVE 112L
Biology of Invertebrates Laboratory
(BIS 001B or (BIS 002B,  BIS 002C)),  EVE 112 (can be concurrent);  EVE 112 required concurrently.Enrollment limited to 50 students.
Field and laboratory experience with representative members of the major invertebrate phyla discussed in EVE 112. Emphasis on comparative morphology, natural history, ecology, and behavior of living invertebrates. Two field trips required.
EVE 114
Experimental Invertebrate Biology
Upper division standing or consent of instructor; introductory cell, animal and plant biology (BIS 001A and BIS 001B and BIS 001C, or BIS 002B), invertebrate zoology (EVE 112),  ecology (EVE 101), and/or evolution (EVE 100) are recommended; residence at or near Bodega Marine Lab required.Enrollment restricted to application at http://www.bml.ucdavis.edu.
Biology, ecology, and evolution of local marine invertebrates with a focus on adaptations to environmental and biological factors encountered on the California coast. Hands-on field and laboratory learning with an emphasis on generating and testing hypotheses.  
EVE 115
Marine Ecology
EVE 101 or ESP 100 or BIS 002B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Processes affecting the distribution, abundance, and diversity of plant and animal life in the sea.  Introduction to marine habitat diversity and human impacts on marine ecosystems.
EVE 117
Plant Ecology
(BIS 001A,  BIS 001B,  BIS 001C) or (BIS 002A,  BIS 002B,  BIS 002C);  PLB 111 recommended.
The study of the interactions between plants, plant populations or vegetation types and their physical and biological environment.  Special emphasis on California.  Four full-day field trips and brief write-up of class project required.
EVE 119
Population Biology of Invasive Plants & Weeds
(BIS 001A,  BIS 001B,  BIS 001C) or (BIS 002A,  BIS 002B,  BIS 002C);  Introductory statistics recommended.
Origin and evolution of invasive plant species and weeds, reproduction and dispersal, seed ecology, modeling of population dynamics, interactions between invasive species, native species, and crops, biological control. Laboratories emphasize design of competition experiments and identification of weedy species.
EVE 120
Global Change Ecology
EVE 100;  EVE 101;  Or equivalents.
Treatment of historical evolution of the biosphere resulting from physical, chemical, and biological influences. Special focus upon changes caused by humans. Topics pertain to biodiversity, resources, conservation, and ecosystem services.  
EVE 131
Human Genetic Variation & Evolution
BIS 001B or BIS 002B.
Introduction to genome-wide nucleotide sequence variation in human populations and computational methods for its analysis. Topics to include forensics, disease gene mapping, and studies of human evolutionary history. Misuses, such as eugenics, and ethical/legal issues will be discussed.
EVE 138
Ecology of Tropical Latitudes
and Consent of Instructor.  One course in Biological Sciences (BIS), Entomology (ENT), Wildlife, Fish, & Conservation Biology (WFC), Geography (GEO), or tropical experience.
Biological, physical, and human-related aspects of the ecology of low latitudes. Distribution, numbers, and relationships of tropical organisms. Problems of development and conservation in the context of ecological and evolutionary theory.
EVE 140
Paleobotany
(BIS 001A,  BIS 001B,  BIS 001C) or (BIS 002A,  BIS 002B,  BIS 002C).
Introduction to plant fossil record, beginning with invasion of land in the Silurian, emphasizing origin and evolution of major groups and adaptations and changing composition and distribution of floras in relation to plate tectonics and climatic change.
EVE 141
Principles of Systematics
BIS 001B or BIS 001C or BIS 002B;  EVE 100 recommended.
Historical background, philosophical rationale, contemporary approaches, and working rules of biosystematics, including International Code of Zoological Nomenclature.
EVE 147
Biogeography
BIS 002B or (BIS 001A,  BIS 001B).
Movements of terrestrial organisms. The role of geologic, climatic, and biologic changes in the geographic distribution of organisms.
EVE 149
Evolution of Ecological Systems
(EVE 101 or ESP 100);  EVE 100;  Or equivalent courses.
Evolution as an organizing force in natural communities. Coadaptation in trophic and competitive relationships. Ecology of polymorphisms, clines, and speciation.
EVE 150
Evolution of Animal Development
BIS 101;  EVE 100;  EVE 100 (may be waived for graduate students with consent of instructor).
Comparative analysis of animal development and the genetic basis of morphological diversification.
EVE 161
Microbial Phylogenomics; Genomic Perspectives on the Diversity & Diversification of Microbes
BIS 002A;  BIS 002B;  BIS 002C;  Or equivalent.
Use of DNA and genomic sequencing in studies of the diversity of microorganisms. Diversity of microbes, phylogenetics, genome sequencing, comparative genomics, phylogenomics, lateral gene transfer, molecular ecology, metagenomics, and studies of the human microbiome.
EVE 175
Computational Genetics
BIS 101;  (STA 100 or STA 102).
The use of computers to solve problems in genetics and evolution.
EVE 180A
Experimental Ecology & Evolution in the Field
EVE 100 (can be concurrent);  (EVE 101 (can be concurrent) or ESP 100 (can be concurrent) or ENT 105 (can be concurrent));  Due to the unusual nature of this course, all prospective students are strongly encouraged to contact the instructor.
Experimental design in field ecology. Examination of primary literature, experimental design, independent and collaborative research, analysis of data, development of original research paper based on field experiments. 
EVE 180B
Experimental Ecology & Evolution in the Field
EVE 180A or ENT 180A.
Experimental design in field ecology. Examination of primary literature, experimental design, independent and collaborative research, analysis of data, development of original research paper based on field experiments.
EVE 181
Ecology & Evolution of Animal-Plant Interactions
BIS 002B;  BIS 002C (can be concurrent).
Animal adaptations for eating plants, pollinating flowers, dispersing seeds. Plant adaptations to herbivore defense, attraction of mutualists; role of coevolutionary arms race, mutualists and cheaters in plant/animal speciation. Exploration through lectures, original scientific literature, discussions and term paper.
EVE 189
Introduction to Biological Research
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing in Evolution & Ecology or related biological science.
Introduction to research methods in biology. Presentation and discussionof research by faculty, graduate, and undergraduate students.
EVE 190
Undergraduate Seminar
Upper division standing in the biological sciences or a related discipline.
Student reports on current topics with emphasis on integration of concepts, synthesis, and state-of-the-art research approaches. Reviews of literature and reports of undergraduate research may be included.
EVE 192
Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of 84 units.
Work experience off and on campus in all subject areas offered in the Department of Evolution & Ecology. Internships supervised by a member of the faculty.
EVE 194HA
Research Honors
Students who have completed 135 units and qualify for the Honors Program (as defined by the current catalog).
Students pursue intensive research under the guidance of a faculty advisor. Students are expected to complete the full three-quarter sequence culminating in the writing of an honors thesis.
EVE 194HB
Research Honors
Students who have completed 135 units and qualify for the Honors Program (as defined by the current catalog).
Students pursue intensive research under the guidance of a faculty advisor. Students are expected to complete the full three-quarter sequence culminating in the writing of an honors thesis.
EVE 194HC
Research Honors
Students who have completed 135 units and qualify for the Honors Program (as defined by the current catalog).
Students pursue intensive research under the guidance of a faculty advisor. Students are expected to complete the full three-quarter sequence culminating in the writing of an honors thesis.
EVE 197T
Tutoring in Biological Sciences 2B
BIS 001B B or better.
Assisting the instructor by tutoring students in a Biological Sciences 2B laboratory. Tutoring is voluntary and is supervised by a Laboratory Teaching Assistant and the Laboratory Coordinator. 
EVE 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

EVE 211
Applied Phylogenetics
EVE 103 or EVE 210 or PBG 200C;  Or equivalent, graduate standing.
Applications of phylogenetic methods to fields outside of systematics. Core lectures/labs in remedial phylogenetics, phylogeography, conservation and comparative morphology. Special topics vary yearly.
EVE 220
Species & Speciation
EVE 100 or PHI 108;  Or the equivalent; HPS 130B recommended.
Current status of species concepts, models of speciation, current research on speciation, and relevance of species to conservation biology.  
EVE 240
Paleobotany & Angiosperm Evolution
PLB 108 or PLB 116 or EVE 140.
Critical analysis of the plant fossil record as a source of evidence on origin, evolution, and phylogeny of the angio-sperms, Cretaceous and Tertiary climates, geographic history of modern taxa, and origin of modern vegetation types.
EVE 290C
Research Conference
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Presentation and discussion of faculty and graduate student research in biology.
EVE 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

EVE 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.

EVE 390
Methods of Teaching
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Practical experience in the methods and problems of teaching. Includes analyses of texts and supporting material, discussion of teaching techniques and preparing and conducting of laboratory and discussion sections.
EXB 090C
Research Conference
EXB 099 (can be concurrent);  Lower division standing in Exercise Biology or related biological science and consent of instructor; EXB 099 required concurrently.
Research findings and methods in exercise biology.  Presentation and discussion of research by faculty and students.
EXB 090X
Lower Division Seminar
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.
Gives freshman or sophomore level students the opportunity to study a special topic in the general area of Exercise Biology in a small class setting.
EXB 092
Exercise Biology Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Enrollment dependent on availability of intern positions.
Work experience in the application of physical activity programs to teaching, recreational, clinical or research situations under department faculty supervision.  
EXB 097T
Tutoring in Exercise Biology
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.
Assisting the professor by tutoring students in exercise biology course-related projects.  
EXB 097TC
Tutoring Exercise Biology in the Community
Consent of instructor and chairperson.
Tutoring in the community in exercise biology related projects under the guidance of the faculty. 
EXB 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of instructor and chairperson.

EXB 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

EXB 101
Exercise Physiology
NPB 101 or NPB 110C;  or Consent of Instructor.
Physiology of Exercise; acute responses and adaptations to training.  Neuromuscular function; bioenergetics; metabolic responses to acute exercise; adaptation to trainings; cardiorespiratory; and, applications to environmental physiology, and human health.
EXB 102
Introduction to Motor Learning & the Psychology of Sport & Exercise
PSC 001 recommended.
Theoretical and practical issues in motor learning, sport psychology, and exercise psychology are examined. Emphasis is placed on how motor skills are acquired and retained, and on the application of social psychology and human motivation studies to human performance.
EXB 104L
Exercise Biology Laboratory
EXB 101 (can be concurrent);  EXB 102 (can be concurrent);  EXB 103 (can be concurrent);  courses may be taken concurrently.
Principles and analytical procedures for assessing fundamental physiological, biomechanical, motor learning and motor control factors which underlie human movement and performance.
EXB 106
Human Gross Anatomy
BIS 002A;  Concurrent enrollment in EXB 106L or CHA 101L strongly recommended.Upper division students only; Pass One open to upper division Exercise Biology or Anthropology majors only; Pass Two open to Seniors in any major; open enrollment at the start of the quarter for upper division students in any major.
Detailed study of the gross anatomical structure of the human body, with emphasis on function and clinical relevance to students entering health care professions.
EXB 106L
Human Gross Anatomy Laboratory
BIS 002A;  EXB 106 (can be concurrent) or CHA 101 (can be concurrent);  Must have completed EXB 106 or CHA 101 or required concurrently.Upper division students only; Pass One open to upper division Exercise Biology or Anthropology majors only; Pass Two open to Seniors in any major; open enrollment at the start of the quarter for upper division students in any major; mandatory attendance on first day of lab.
Detailed study of prosected human cadavers in small group format with extensive hands-on experience.
EXB 110
Exercise Metabolism
EXB 101 or NPB 101 or NPB 110C.
Exercise metabolism, with emphasis on skeletal muscle and cardiac muscle metabolism during activity and inactivity. Basics of bioenergetics, substrate utilization, and cell signaling; mechanisms that regulate these properties, and differences between skeletal muscle and cardiac muscle metabolism.
EXB 111
Environmental Effects on Physical Performance
EXB 101;  or Consent of Instructor.
The effects of thermal, barometric and gravitational conditions on physiological function and physical performance of humans.  Acute and chronic effects, emphasizing physiological adaptations and limitations, will be studied.
EXB 112
Clinical Exercise Physiology
NPB 101 or NPB 110C;  or Consent of Instructor.
Physical activity as a therapeutic modality in normal and diseased populations (cardiovascular, pulmonary, diabetic). Effects of exercise and inactivity in terms of normal physiology, pathophysiology, and therapeutic benefit. Exercise fitness and disease assessment methods.
EXB 115
Biomechanical Bases of Movement
EXB 103;  or Consent of Instructor.
Biomechanical bases of human movement investigated; topics include musculo-skeletal mechanics, tissue mechanics, electromyography,locomotion.
EXB 116
Nutrition for Physically Active Persons
EXB 101;  NPB 101.
The role of nutrition and exercise in modifying metabolism, body composition, performance and health of humans.
EXB 117
Exercise & Aging in Health & Disease
NPB 101 or NPB 110C;  or Consent of Instructor.
Etiology of and standard therapy for various diseases associated with inactivity and aging; e.g., cardiovascular, pulmonary, diabetes, obesity, lipemias, etc. Exercise will then be considered as a protective and/or therapeutic modality.
EXB 121
Advanced Sport Psychology
EXB 102;  PSC 001 recommended.
Advanced study and consideration of major theoretical and practical issues in sport psychology. Emphasis on practical application to sport and human performance.
EXB 122
Psychological Effects of Physical Activity
PSC 001 or PSC 001Y.Upper division standing.
Physical activity is evaluated in terms of its ability to enhance the quality of life. Topics studied include:  individual factors (self concept, type A); special populations (elderly, cardiovascular); and mental health changes (depression, anxiety).
EXB 124
Physiology of Maximal Human Performance
EXB 101;  or Consent of Instructor.  BIS 101, BIS 102, and BIS 103 recommended.
Molecular mechanisms underlying adaptation to training. Learn how to exercise to maximize their own performance as well as learning how the frequency, intensity and timing of exercise and nutrition affect the molecular signals that underlie performance.
EXB 125
Neuromuscular & Behavioral Aspects of Motor Control
EXB 101.
Factors which affect control of movement from neuropsychological, physiological, behavioral, and mechanical viewpoints. Topics include central vs. peripheral control mechanisms, open and closed loop theories, motor programming, cognitive learning strategies, and the effects of biochemical and biomechanical influences.
EXB 148
Theory & Practice of Exercise Testing
EXB 112 (can be concurrent).
Theory and practice of exercise testing applied to older adult populations. Physiological responses to and limitations of exercise testing. Application of exercise testing and training to healthy and diseased populations.
EXB 148L
Adult Fitness Testing Laboratory
EXB 148 (can be concurrent);  EXB 148 required concurrently.
Testing symptomatic and asymptomatic older adults for functional aerobic capacity, body composition, blood lipids, pulmonary function, and cardiovascular disease risk. Counseling adults in appropriate exercise programs and lifestyle modifications. Two quarters minimum; third quarter permitted. (Former course PHE 148L).
EXB 179
Frontiers in Exercise Biology
EXB 101;  EXB 102;  EXB 103 (can be concurrent);  EXB 104L recommended.
Lectures by leading authorities and discussion of the latest research in newly emerging areas in exercise biology. Offered every fourth year.
EXB 189
International Perspectives in Exercise Biology
EXB 010;  Or upper division standing in Exercise Biology; consent of instructor: students will be accepted based upon academic merit, personal experience, and academic discipline in order to provide multidisciplinary perspectives.Restricted to 22 students.
Compare and contrast exercise science issues between the US and an international location. Identify political, economic, cultural, technological and environmental issues that impact human exercise, physical activity, wellness, and sport from a global perspective.  
EXB 190C
Research Conference
EXB 099 (can be concurrent);  Upper division standing in Exercise Biology or related biological science and consent of instructor; EXB 199 required concurrently.Restricted to upper division students.
Research findings and methods in exercise biology. Presentation and discussion of research by faculty and students.
EXB 192
Exercise Biology Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Enrollment dependent on availability of intern positions.
Work experience in the application of physical activity programs to teaching, recreational, clinical or research situations under program faculty supervision. Written report required.
EXB 194H
Research Honors
Senior standing; minimum of 6 units of EXB 199; 3.500 GPA or greater in major courses; consent of honors thesis advisor.
Completion of individual honors research project in Exercise Biology, under the guidance of an Exercise Biology faculty advisor, culminating in written honors thesis.
EXB 197T
Tutoring in Exercise Biology
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Assisting the instructor by tutoring students in exercise biology course-related projects.  
EXB 197TC
Tutoring Exercise Biology in the Community
Consent of instructor and chairperson.
Tutoring in the community in exercise biology related projects under the guidance of the faculty.  
EXB 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of instructor and chairperson.

EXB 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of chairperson.

EXS 201
Exercise Cardiorespiratory Physiology
Undergraduate course in systemic physiology, exercise physiology, and biochemistry (intermediary metabolism).
Advanced course on integrated responses of the cardiovascular and respiratory systems to exercise.  Includes hemodynamic, neurohormonal, and autonomic aspects of cardiac and vascular function, principles of myocardial metabolism, and mechanisms underlying changes in pulmonary function and gas transport.
FAH 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study.
FAH 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study.
FAP 092C
Primary Care Clinic
Consent of Instructor.  Enrollment at the UC Davis campus, for freshman and sophomore students.
Students must apply and interview with the Board of Clinica Tepati or Imani Clinic. Field experience exposes lower division students to health care delivery, patient histories, physical examinations,health promotion, disease prevention, diagnosis; treatment of episodic,acute,chronic illness; appropriate referral and follow-up.
FAP 192C
Primary Care Clinics
Consent of Instructor.  Enrollment at the UC Davis campus; upper division standing.
Students must apply and interview with the Board of Clinica Tepati or Imani Clinic. Field experience introduces students to health care delivery, patient histories and physical examinations, health promotions and disease prevention, diagnosis and treatment of episodic, acute and chronic illness, basic laboratory testing and appropriate referral and follow-up. 
FAP 195
Health Care to Underserved Populations
Sociology, political science, or applied behavioral science background recommended, or registration in medical school.
Discusses sociocultural perspectives of underserved populations in California impacting their health; roles of family/interpersonal relationships in making health care decisions; and clinician's perspectives in treating people of cultures which are unfamiliar and/or uncomfortable with Western medicine.
FAP 401
Introductory Preceptorship in Family Practice
Completion of first-year of medical training.
Preceptorship in family practice offered as an introduction to clinicalmedicine. 20 hours or 40 hours per week in a family physician's office, doing patient interviews, historytaking, and performing physical exams.
FAP 405
The Healer's Art
Consent of Instructor.Limited to first-year medical students.
Learning to strengthen your humanity and remain open-hearted can make the difference between burnout and a fulfilling life. Learn tools for selfcare, healing, finding meaning, strengthening commitment and becoming a true physician.
FAP 411
Selected Studies of Systems for Chronic Illness Care
FAP 400A;  FAP 400B;  FAP 400C;  Medical students with consent of instructor.
Understanding of chronic illness, particularly diabetes, participate in patient care, alternative techniques. 
FAP 430
Family Medicine Clerkship
Approval by School of Medicine Committee on Student Progress.
Family medicine clerkship for third year medical students. 
FAP 430FA
SJVP Longitudinal Family Medicine Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.  Approval by School of Medicine Committee on Student Progress.
Longitudinal Family Medicine Clerkship runs concurrently with Internal Medicine, Pediatrics and Psychiatry for 32 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. 
FAP 430FB
SJVP Longitudinal Family Medicine Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.  Approval by School of Medicine Committee on Student Progress.
Longitudinal Family Medicine Clerkship runs concurrently with Internal Medicine, Pediatrics and Psychiatry for 32 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. 
FAP 430FC
SJVP Longitudinal Family Medicine Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.  Approval by School of Medicine Committee on Student Progress.
Longitudinal Family Medicine Clerkship runs concurrently with Internal Medicine, Pediatrics and Psychiatry for 32 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. 
FAP 430FD
SJVP Longitudinal Family Medicine Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.  Approval by School of Medicine Committee on Student Progress.
Longitudinal Family Medicine Clerkship runs concurrently with Internal Medicine, Pediatrics and Psychiatry for 32 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. 
FAP 430R
Rural PRIME Family Medicine Longitudinal Clerkship
Approval by School of Medicine Committee on Student Progress.
Family Medicine Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
FAP 430RA
Rural PRIME Family Medicine Longitudinal Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.
Family Medicine Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
FAP 430RB
Rural PRIME Family Medicine Longitudinal Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.
Family Medicine Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
FAP 430RC
Rural PRIME Family Medicine Longitudinal Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.
Family Medicine Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
FAP 430RD
Rural PRIME Family Medicine Longitudinal Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.
Family Medicine Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
FAP 430TA
TeachMS Longitudinal Primary Care Clerkship (A)
Consent of Instructor.  Approval by School of Medicine Committee on Student Progress.
Longitudinal Clerkship runs concurrently with Internal Medicine and Psychiatry for 24 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. On-going patient write-ups, rounds, conferences are required.
FAP 430TB
TeachMS Longitudinal Primary Care Clerkship (B)
Consent of Instructor.  Approval by School of Medicine Committee on Student Progress.
Longitudinal Clerkship runs concurrently with Internal Medicine and Psychiatry for 24 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. On-going patient write-ups, rounds, conferences are required.
FAP 430TC
TeachMS Longitudinal Primary Care Clerkship (C)
Consent of Instructor.  Approval by School of Medicine Committee on Student Progress.
Longitudinal Clerkship runs concurrently with Internal Medicine and Psychiatry for 24 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. On-going patient write-ups, rounds, conferences are required.
FAP 431
Introduction to Primary Care Continuity Clinic
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of the Pre-Clinical Curriculum.
Longitudinal component of the third-year primary care curriculum. Attend clinic roughly 18 half-days over the course of the year, working one-on-one with a primary care preceptor.
FAP 431A
Primary Care Continuity Clinic
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of the Pre-Clinical Curriculum.
Longitudinal component of the third-year primary care curriculum. Attend clinic roughly 18 half-days over the course of the year, working one-on-one with a primary care preceptor.
FAP 431B
Primary Care Continuity Clinic
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of the Pre-Clinical Curriculum.
Longitudinal component of the third-year primary care curriculum. Attend clinic roughly 18 half-days over the course of the year, working one-on-one with a primary care preceptor.
FAP 431C
Primary Care Continuity Clinic
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of the Pre-Clinical Curriculum.
Longitudinal component of the third-year primary care curriculum. Attend clinic roughly 18 half-days over the course of the year, working one-on-one with a primary care preceptor.
FAP 431D
Primary Care Continuity Clinic
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of the Pre-Clinical Curriculum.
Longitudinal component of the third-year primary care curriculum. Attend clinic roughly 18 half-days over the course of the year, working one-on-one with a primary care preceptor.
FAP 431KA
ACE-PC Continuity Clinic
Consent of Instructor.
Longitudinal clinic component of the second year of the ACE-PC Program. Start with a four-week immersion experience and then 12 additional half-days over the course of the year, working one-on-one with a primary care preceptor.
FAP 431KB
ACE-PC Continuity Clinic
Consent of Instructor.
Longitudinal clinic component of the second year of the ACE-PC Program. Start with a four-week immersion experience and then 12 additional half-days over the course of the year, working one-on-one with a primary care preceptor.
FAP 431KC
ACE-PC Continuity Clinic
Consent of Instructor.
Longitudinal clinic component of the second year of the ACE-PC Program. Start with a four-week immersion experience and then 12 additional half-days over the course of the year, working one-on-one with a primary care preceptor.
FAP 431KD
ACE-PC Continuity Clinic
Consent of Instructor.
Longitudinal clinic component of the second year of the ACE-PC Program. Start with a four-week immersion experience and then 12 additional half-days over the course of the year, working one-on-one with a primary care preceptor.
FAP 439D
Directed Clinical Studies in Family Medicine
Consent of Instructor.
Individual directed studies in extended preparation for modified curriculum or to complete a clinical rotation following a leave of absence.
FAP 439R
Directed Studies in Family Medicine
Consent of Instructor.
Individual directed studies in extended preparation for remediation of all or part of clinical rotation. Clinical studies to accommodate and satisfy remedial work as directed by the Committee on Student Progress and approved by the course IOR.
FAP 444
Advanced Preceptorship in Family Medicine
Completion of third-year primary care plus clerkship or consent of instructor.Open to medical students only.
Preceptorships with primary care physicians in a variety of settings. Acquisition skills to evaluate and devleop a treatment plan for patients with common medical problems seen by primary care physicians in an out patient setting. 
FAP 460
Geriatrics in Community Health
FAP 430.
Visits to community agencies including mental health teams, adult day health centers, a diagnostic and research center, and case management specialists. Observation and participation in MMSE's, patient-family conferences, interdisciplinary team meetings, neuropsychiatric testing and home visit evaluations.
FAP 468
International Preceptorship
Medical students with consent of instructor.
Preceptorship with a family practitioner in a foreign country (Arranged by student contact or with assistance of the Family and Community Medicine Department.) Participate in clinical activities, analyze and report characteristics of the practice.
FAP 469
Inpatient Acting Internship in Family Medicine
Completion of third-year of medical school or consent of instructor.Open to medical students only. 
Comprehensive primary medical care of inpatients on a family medicine hospital service. Available sites are university-based family medicine residency programs and programs within the UC Davis Network of Affiliated Family Medicine Residency Programs.
FAP 470
Inpatient Clinical Elective in Family Medicine
Completion of third-year of medical school or consent of instructor.Open to medical students only. 
Comprehensive primary medical care of patients on a family medicine hospital service. Usually includes inpatient and outpatient experience.
FAP 475
Combined Inpatient/Outpatient Clinical Elective in Family Medicine
Completion of third-year of medical school or consent of instructor.Open to Medical students only. 
Combined inpatient and outpatient elective. Consists of comprehensive primary medical care of patients on a family medicine hospital service and in a family medicine outpatient clinic.
FAP 488
Selected Studies in Family Practice
Medical students with consent of instructor.
Assigned readings in family practice to increase understanding on selected topics relating to family medicine and primary health care delivery; visits to and written analysis of selected health care programs; and/or exposure to family practice with a community physician preceptor.
FAP 490
Health Care to Underserved Populations
Sociology, Political Science, or Applied Behavioral Science background recommended, or registration in medical school.
Discusses sociocultural perspectives of underserved populations impacting health; roles of family/interpersonal relationships in making health care decisions; the nature of ethnic/racial/socioeconomic health care disparities; and clinicians' perspectives in treating people of cultures which are unfamiliar and/or uncomfortable with Western medicine.
FAP 493
Aging & Health
Consent of Instructor.
Is disease and infirmity the inevitable consequence of aging? We will spend four weeks exploring this question by reviewing the biology of aging, physiologic changes seen in aged individuals and disease processes commonly found in elderly persons. 
FAP 499
Research
Medical students with consent of instructor.
Research in various aspects of the health care delivery system.
FMS 090X
Lower Division Seminar
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.
Study of a special topic in Film Studies in a small class setting.
FMS 120
Italian-American Cinema
FMS 001.
Exploration of representations of Italian-American identity in American (U.S.) cinema.  Analysis of both Hollywood and independently produced films, especially as they represent ethnicity, gender, and social class of Italian Americans.
FMS 121
New Italian Cinema
FMS 001;  and upper division standing, or consent of instructor.
Italian cinema of the 21st century in the context of profound cultural and social changes in Italy since World War II. Productions by representative directors such as Amelio, Giordana, Moretti, Muccino are included.  Knowledge of Italian not required.
FMS 121S
New Italian Cinema
FMS 001;  and upper division standing, or consent of instructor.
Italian cinema of the 21st century in the context of profound cultural and social changes in Italy since World War II. Productions by representative directors such as Amelio, Giordana, Moretti, Muccino are included. Knowledge of Italian not required. May be taught abroad.
FMS 124
Topics in U.S. Film History
FMS 001.
Study of an aspect of American film history (such as the silent era; the studio system; U.S. avant-garde cinema), including the influences of technological, economic, regulatory, cultural, and artistic forces.
FMS 125
Topics in Film Genres
FMS 001.
A study of one or more of the film genres (such as the documentary, the musical, film noir, screwball comedy, or the western), including genre theory and the relationship of the genre(s) to culture, history, and film industry practices.
FMS 127
Film Theory
FMS 001;  or Consent of Instructor.
Survey of the conceptual frameworks used to study film (including semiotics, psychoanalysis, spectatorship, auteur, genre and narrative theories). Historical survey of major film theorists.
FMS 129
Russian Film
Completion of Subject A requirement.
History of Russian film; film & social revolution, the cult of Stalin, dissident visions; film & the collapse of the Soviet empire; gender and the nation in Russian film. Taught in English; Russian films with English subtitles.
FMS 176A
Classic Weimar Cinema
HUM 001.
German Weimar (1919-1933) cinema.  Fritz Lang, F.W. Murnau, and G.W. Pabst among others.  Influence on world-wide (esp. Hollywood) film genres such as film noir, horror, science fiction, and melodrama.
FMS 176B
Postwar German Cinema
FMS 001.
Exploration of German cinema from 1945 to 1980, when the Nazi past was a central theme.  Includes study of postwar "rubble films," escapist "homeland films," and New German Cinema of the 1970s (including films by Fassbinder, Kluge, Syberberg, and Herzog). 
FMS 189
Special Topics in Film Studies
FMS 001;  or Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Group study of a special topic in film, focusing on a national tradition, a major filmmaker, or a specific era.  
FMS 189
Special Topics in Film Studies
FMS 001;  or Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Group study of a special topic in film, focusing on a national tradition, a major filmmaker, or a specific era.  
FMS 190X
Upper Division Seminar
Upper division standing or consent of instructor.
Study of a special topic in film studies in a small class setting.
FMS 194H
Special Study for Honors Students
Consent of Instructor.  Senior standing; GPA of at least 3.500.
Guided research on a topic in Film Studies in preparation for the writing of an honors thesis in FMA 195H or the creation of an honors project in FMS 196H.  
FMS 195H
Honors Thesis
FMS 194H;  and Consent of Instructor.  GPA of at least 3.500; senior standing.
Writing of an honors thesis on a topic in Film Studies under the direction of a faculty member. 
FMS 196H
Honors Project
FMS 194H;  and Consent of Instructor.  Senior standing, GPA of at least 3.500.
Creation of an honors film, video, or mixed-media project under the direction of a faculty member.  
FOR 201A
Forensic Science Fundamentals-A
Consent of Instructor.  Enrolled in the Forensic Science Graduate Program.Open to Forensic Science Graduate Program students only.
Professional responsibilities and ethics, physical evidence concepts, drug chemistry and toxicology, controlled substances and analytical chemistry and instrumentation as practiced in the forensic sciences. First of three courses that, in part, covers the curriculum requirements of the Forensic Education Program Accreditation Committee (FEPAC).
FOR 201B
Forensic Science Fundamentals-B
Consent of Instructor.  Enrolled in the Forensic Science Graduate Program.Open to Forensic Science Graduate Program students only.
Forensic biology and DNA, microscopy and materials analysis and pattern evidence as practiced in the forensic sciences. Second in a series of three courses which covers the curriculum requirements of the Forensic Education Program Accreditation Committee (FEPAC).
FOR 201C
Forensic Science Fundamentals-C
Consent of Instructor.  Enrolled in the Forensic Science Graduate Program.
Arson and explosives, quality assurance and accreditation, the law and science interface and court testimony as practiced in the forensic sciences. Third in a series of three courses that covers the curriculum requirements of the Forensic Education Program Accreditation Committee (FEPAC).
FOR 205
Microscopy & Microanalytical Methods in Forensic Science
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to students enrolled in the M.S. in Forensic Science Program; a minimum, year each of the following chemistry, organic chemistry, calculus, & physics. 
Introduction to optical and electron microscopy. Transmission, diffraction, reflection and absorption; polarized light and polarizing crystals; phase contrast. Radiography; image recording, SEM analysis of gunshot residues, paints, glass. EDS, XRF analysis, signal-to-noise ratios, minimum detectable levels and homogeneity.
FOR 209
Forensic Alcohol
FOR 220 (can be concurrent);  and Consent of Instructor.
Analytical methods used in the determination and quantitation of ethanol in biological matrices commonly encountered in cases involving operating a motor vehicle.  
FOR 218
Technical Writing in Forensic Science
Consent of the instructor required for all students not enrolled in the Forensic Science program.Restricted to graduate standing in the Forensic Science program.
How to write clear, credible forensic science reports and scientific articles, that (a) serve the ends of the justice system, (b) meet their readers varying needs and (c) reflect well on the author. 
FOR 220
Analysis of Toxicants
Coursework in organic chemistry.
Principles of microanalysis of toxicants. Theoretical considerations regarding separation, detection and quantitative determination of toxicants using chemical and instrumental techniques.
FOR 263
Forensic Computer Science Investigations
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate student.Restricted to students in the Forensic Science Graduate program unless approved by instructor.
Discuss the threats to the security of any kind of evidence that is captured, transmitted, or stored digitally and develop critical thinking and basic knowledge of computer forensic science issues in the evaluation of digital evidence.
FOR 276
Population Genetics
FOR 280;  FOR 281;  or Consent of Instructor.Open only to majors in Forensic Science Program unless by consent of the Chair Forensic Science Graduate group.
Principles, theories, and models of population genetics as they apply to forensic science.  
FOR 277
Forensic Genetics; Next Generation Techniques & Applications
Undergraduate courses in fundamental and applied principles of: genetics, biochemistry, and molecular biology, or consent of instructor.Restricted to Forensic Science Graduate students (GFOR) or consent of instructor.
Review organization/function of the human genome, recent developments, next generation sequencing techniques including the preparation of DNA samples, principles of the new generation sequencing assay formats and biochemical reactions. Includes quality control parameter, and bioinformatic approaches.
FOR 278
Molecular Techniques
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Recombinant DNA technology and its applications.
FOR 280
Forensic DNA Analysis
Coursework in genetics and molecular biology.Graduate standing; consent of instructor required for all students not enrolled in the M.S. Forensics program.
Foundation in theory and practice of forensic DNA analysis; past, present, and emerging technologies; legal and quality assurance issues. DNA extraction, DNA quantitation, multiplex amplification of STR loci, capillary electrophoresis of amplified products, and analysis of STR typing data. 
FOR 281
Principles & Practice of Forensic Serology & DNA Analysis
(FOR 278 or ETX 278) or (FOR 280 or ETX 280);  and Consent of Instructor.  Or equivalent of FOR 280/ETX 280.Restricted to students enrolled in the M.S. in Forensic Science Program or by consent of Forensic Science Program Director.
Comprehensive overview of forensic serology and DNA typing techniques and technologies. Strong emphasis on real-world applications, including preservation and tracking of biological evidence, detection and identification of bodily fluids, and methods to extract, quantify, and type human DNA.
FOR 284
Non-Human Forensic DNA; Theory & Casework Application
Consent of instructor required for all students not enrolled in the M.S. Forensics program; upper division Molecular Biology and Genetics or its equivalent.Restricted to graduate standing. 
Provides a comprehensive understanding of plant and animal forensic biology in terms of sample collection, preservation, analytical methods, and of the invaluable lines of inquiry these forensic evidence may permit.
FOR 299
Research in Forensic Science
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to students enrolled in the M.S. in Forensic Science Program.

FPS 100
Principles of Polymer Materials Science
CHE 002A;  CHE 002B;  ((CHE 008A,  CHE 008B) or (ENG 045 or ENG 045Y));  Introductory physics.
Basic principles of polymer science are presented including polymer structure and synthesis; polymerization mechanisms, polymer classes, properties, and reactions; polymer morphology, rheology, and characterization; polymer processing.
FPS 110
Plastics in Society & the Environment
CHE 010;  Or introductory course in physical sciences.
Basic concepts and methodologies in the study of plastics. Formation, classification, structure, properties, processing, and formulation. Their application to societal needs, and their impact on society and the environment.
FPS 150
Polymer Syntheses & Reactions
(CHE 128B or CHE 008B);  CHE 107A.
Organic and physical chemistry aspects of polymer syntheses and reactions including polymerization mechanisms, kinetics and thermodynamics for major types of organic high polymers.
FPS 161
Structure & Properties of Fibers
TXC 006;  CHE 008B.
Structure, properties and reactions of natural- and man-made fibers; the relations between molecular structure of fibers and their physical properties; interactions of fibers and detergents.
FPS 161L
Textile Chemical Analysis Laboratory
FPS 161 (can be concurrent).
Laboratory methods and procedures employed in qualitative and quantitative analysis of textile fibers and auxiliaries.
FPS 180A
Introduction to Research in Fiber & Polymer Science
Consent of Instructor.  Senior standing in major related to Fiber and Polymer Science.
Senior thesis on independent problems. Research begun in TXC 180A continued and completed in TXC 180B.
FPS 180B
Introduction to Research in Fiber & Polymer Science
Consent of Instructor.  Senior standing in major related to Fiber and Polymer Science.
Senior thesis on independent problems. Research begun in TXC 180A continued and completed in TXC 180B.
FPS 197T
Tutoring in Fiber & Polymer Science
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division fiber and polymer science related major.
Tutoring of students in Fiber & Polymer Science courses. Assistance with discussion groups and laboratory sections under supervision of instructor.
FPS 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Group Study
FPS 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Special Study
FPS 250A
Special Topics in Polymer & Fiber Science
FPS 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Selected topics of current interest in polymer and fiber sciences. Topics vary each time course is offered.
FPS 250B
Special Topics in Polymer & Fiber Science
FPS 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Selected topics of current interest in polymer and fiber sciences. Topics vary each time course is offered.
FPS 250E
Special Topics in Polymer & Fiber Science
FPS 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Selected topics of current interest in polymer and fiber sciences. Topics vary each time course is offered. 
FPS 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Graduate standing.
Teaching assistant, training practicum. 
FRE 001A
Accelerated Intensive Elementary French
Placement exam required.
Introduction to French grammar and development of all language skills in a cultural context with special emphasis on communication. Special 12-week, accelerated, intensive summer session course that combines the work of FRE 001, FRE 002, and FRE 003. 
FRE 002
Elementary French
FRE 001.
Continuation of FRE 001.
FRE 003
Elementary French
FRE 002.
Continuation of FRE 002.
FRE 021
Intermediate French
FRE 001A or FRE 003 or FRE 003S.
Review of grammar and vocabulary acquired in the elementary sequence, as well as the study of new grammatical structures and a continuing enrichment of vocabulary through oral work in class, written exercises, readings and compositions.
FRE 022
Intermediate French
FRE 021 or FRE 021S.
Continuation of FRE 021 or FRE 021S. Review of grammar and vocabulary, as well as the study of new grammatical structures and a continuing enrichment of vocabulary.
FRE 023
Intermediate French
FRE 022 or FRE 022S.
Continuation of  FRE 022 or FRE 022S. Review of grammar and vocabulary, as well as the study of new grammatical structures and a continuing enrichment of vocabulary.
FRE 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

FRE 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

FRE 100
Composition in French
FRE 023.
Instruction and practice in expository writing in French, with emphasis on organization, correct syntax, and vocabulary building.
FRE 101
Introduction to French Poetry
FRE 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Analysis and evaluation of works representing the main types of Frenchpoetry. Study of French poetic conventions and versification.
FRE 102
Introduction to French Drama
FRE 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Analysis and evaluation of plays representing the main types of Frenchdrama, with emphasis on dramatic structure and techniques.
FRE 103
Introduction to French Prose
FRE 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Analysis and evaluation of works representing main types of French prose, with emphasis on narrative structure and techniques.
FRE 104
Translation
FRE 100;  Or the equivalent.
Practice in English-to-French and French-to-English translation using a variety of non-literary materials, illustrating different problems and styles.
FRE 105
Advanced French Grammar
FRE 023;  Or equivalent.
Understanding of, and extensive practice with, various grammatical structures in French. Lexical-semantic, morphological, and syntactic analysis. 
FRE 106
French in Business & the Professions
FRE 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
French language as used in the commercial sphere. Emphasis on proper style and form in letter-writing, and in non-literary composition. Technical terminology in such diverse fields as government and world business.
FRE 107
The Making of Modern France
FRE 023;  Consent of Instructor.
Introduction to French culture through a historical approach to topics such as the citizen and the state (politics, justice, social security), the nation and centralization, the rise of public education, colonization, class and social relationships.
FRE 107A
Pre- & Early-Modern France
FRE 023;  Consent of Instructor.
Introduction to pre- and early-modern French culture through a historical approach to topics such as the feudal system, the rise of the monarchy, the Reformation and religious wars.
FRE 107B
The Making of Modern France
FRE 023;  Consent of Instructor.
Introduction to French culture through a historical approach to topics such as the absolute monarchy, the role of the parlements, the French revolution, and the political regimes of the 19th century.
FRE 108
Modern French Culture
FRE 023.
Survey of modern French culture from the Dreyfus affair to the present day.  Topics may include women and French culture, decolonialization and modernization, education, social welfare and immigration.
FRE 109
French Phonetics
FRE 023;  Or equivalent.
Introduction to the sound-inventory of French and practice in phonetic transcription, with a focus on ways in which phonetic contrasts signal grammatical contrasts; spoken forms and spelling; formal differences between the "Standard" and other varieties across the French-speaking world.
FRE 110
Stylistics & Creative Composition
FRE 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Intensive course in creative composition using a variety of techniques and literary styles, patterned on Queneau's Exercices de style. Practice in such stylistic modifications as inversion, antithesis, changes in tense, mood, tonality, etc. The writing of poetry.
FRE 115
Medieval French Literature & Society
FRE 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Social and cultural life of medieval France as studied through its representation in such literary works as La Chanson de Roland, courtly love lyric, the Arthurian romances of Chrtien de Troyes, Aucassin et Nicolette, selected fabliaux and farces.
FRE 116
The French Renaissance
FRE 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Overview of major works and writers with particular attention to the historical context of the turbulent 16th century. Writers to be read may include Rabelais, Marot, Ronsard, Du Bellay, Lab, Marguerite de Navarre, Montaigne, and D'Aubign. 
FRE 117A
Baroque & Preclassicism
FRE 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Literature and intellectual culture of the period between the Renaissance and French classicism.
FRE 117B
The Classical Moment
FRE 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Literature, culture, and politics in the Age of Louis XIV. 
FRE 118A
Age of Reason & Revolution
FRE 100.
Literature and philosophy of the French Enlightenment. Readings from such authors as Bayle, Fontenelle, Montesquieu, Voltaire, Rousseau and Diderot.
FRE 118B
Private Lives & Public Secrets: The Early French Novel
FRE 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
History of the French roman from the Middle Ages to the Revolution with particular emphasis on the novels of the 18th century.
FRE 119A
The Romantic Imaginary
FRE 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Major concepts and themes of French Romanticism, such as dream and the supernatural, impossible love, exoticism, revolution, individualism, nature, the mal du sicle, Romantic irony, the creative imagination, the cult of ruin.
FRE 119B
Realism, History & the Novel
FRE 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Narrative and historical codes of French realist fiction, with emphasis on the representation of history in the realist novel, its depiction of social "realities" such as class and gender, and its relation to the historical situation of post-revolutionary society.
FRE 119C
From Baudelaire to Surrealism
FRE 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Study of the main poets and poetic movements from the mid-19th to the early 20th century, including Baudelaire, the Symbolists, and the Surrealists.
FRE 120
Modern French Thought
FRE 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Overview of post-Second World War French intellectual currents from existentialism to structuralism and deconstructionism. Readings will include Sartre and de Beauvoir, Camus, Lvi-Strauss, Lacan, Barthes, Foucault, Derrida, Kristeva, Sollers, Cixous, and Irigaray.
FRE 121
20th-Century French Novel
FRE 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Novels and theories of the novel, from Proust to the Nouveau Roman and beyond. Readings from among Gide, Sartre, de Beauvoir, Camus, Breton, Beckett, Robbe-Grillet, Sarraute, Simon, Barthes, Duras, Tournier, Perec, Modiano, Guibert, Toussaint.
FRE 122
French & Francophone Film
FRE 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
French and Francophone film from the Lumire Brothers to the present. Topics may include analysis of film form and narrative, major filmmakers and filmic traditions, and film theory.
FRE 124
Post-Colonial & Francophone Literature
FRE 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Post-Independence Black African and/or Caribbean and/or North African literatures written in French. Selected topics include: identity & subjectivity, the role of the intellectual, women's voices, languages & oral literatures, cultural syncretism, theories of post-colonialism.
FRE 125
French Literature & Other Arts
FRE 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Relationship between French literature and other arts-painting, music, cinema, architecture, opera-from different periods.
FRE 127
Paris: Modernity & Metropolitan Culture
FRE 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Representation of Paris in 19th- and 20th-century texts and its importance in defining the experience and art of modernity.
FRE 128
Topics in French Culture
FRE 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
In-depth study of a particular topic in French culture. Topics may include the Court of Louis XIV, the French Revolution and Immigration.
FRE 128
Topics in French Culture
FRE 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
In-depth study of a particular topic in French culture. Topics may include the Court of Louis XIV, the French Revolution and Immigration.
FRE 130
From Page to Stage: Theatre & Theatricality
FRE 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
French theater as literature and performance. 
FRE 133
Gender & Politics in French Literature & Culture
FRE 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Thematic, theoretical and political tendencies in contemporary French fiction. Barthes, Foucault, Duras, Guibert, considered in terms of their writing on identity and gender.
FRE 140
Study of a Major Writer
FRE 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Concentrated study of works of a single author.
FRE 141
Selected Topics in French Literature
FRE 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Subjects and themes such as satiric and didactic poetry of the Middle Ages, poetry of the Pliade, theater in the 18th century, pre-romantic poetry, autobiography, literature and film, etc.
FRE 160
Linguistic Study of French: Sound & Form
FRE 100 or LIN 001 or LIN 001Y.
Introduction to the linguistic study of modern French, with focus on sound structure and form, inflection and derivation.
FRE 161
Linguistic Study of French: Form & Meaning
FRE 100 or LIN 001 or LIN 001Y.
Introduction to the linguistic study of modern French, with focus on sentence construction and constituency, meaning and discourse functions.
FRE 162
History of the French Language
FRE 100 or LIN 001 or LIN 001Y.
Main periods in development of the French language, from Latin to contemporary popular aspects, with emphasis on relationship between socio-cultural patterns and evolution of the language.
FRE 192
Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Practical application of the French language through work experience in government and/or business, culminating in an analytical term paper on a topic approved by the sponsoring instructor.
FRE 194H
Special Study for Honors Students
Open only to French majors of senior standing who qualify for Honors Program.
Guided research, under the direction of a faculty member, leading to a senior honors thesis on a topic in French literature, civilization, orlanguage studies.
FRE 195H
Honors Thesis
FRE 194H.
Writing of an honors thesis on a topic in French literature, civilization, or language studies under the direction of a faculty member.
FRE 197T
Tutoring in French
Upper division standing and consent of Chairperson.
Tutoring in undergraduate courses including leadership in small voluntary discussion groups affiliated with departmental courses.
FRE 197TC
Tutoring in the Community
Upper division standing and consent of Chairperson.
Tutoring in public schools under the guidance of a regular teacher and supervision by a departmental faculty member.
FRE 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

FRE 198S
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Group study on focused topics in French literature and culture. Taught abroad.
FRE 200
Introduction to Graduate Study in French
Consent of Instructor.Graduate standing.
Introduction to a range of methodologies and critical practices in the field of French Studies, including literature, culture, and linguistics. Covers basic principles of bibliographic research in the humanities.
FRE 201
History of French
Consent of Instructor.Graduate standing.
Presentation of the main changes in the grammatical structures of French, from Latin to contemporary usage, involving textual analysis and sociolinguistic description.  
FRE 202
Topics in French Civilization
Consent of Instructor.Graduate standing.
Interdisciplinary approach to the study of French and Francophone civilization from the Middle Ages to the present. Content varies by instructor.
FRE 204
Topics in Medieval Literature
Consent of Instructor.Graduate standing.
Study of Medieval French literature, focusing on a particular period, milieu, literary movement, genre, or theoretical approach.
FRE 205A
16th-Century Literature: The Humanists
Consent of Instructor.Graduate standing.
French humanism in its most varied forms. Although at different times Rabelais and Montaigne will be primarily studied, other leading intellectuals and religious writers will also receive attention.
FRE 206A
17th-Century Literature: Theater
Consent of Instructor.Graduate standing.
Works of Corneille, Racine, Molire, and minor dramatists. One or more authors may be covered.
FRE 206B
17th-Century Literature: Prose
Consent of Instructor.Graduate standing.
Works of authors such as Pascal, Descartes, Mme de Lafayette. One or more authors may be covered.
FRE 206C
17th-Century Literature: Poetry
Consent of Instructor.Graduate standing.
Studies of the works of one or more poets of the period.
FRE 207A
18th-Century Literature: Philosophies
Consent of Instructor.Graduate standing.
Not a course in philosophy, but an examination of the role of philosophy in the design and context of literary works. Study of one or more authors. 
FRE 207B
18th-Century Literature: Novel
Consent of Instructor.Graduate standing.
Rise of the novel. Study of narrative experiments in the context of the philosophical climate and new literary values. May treat one or more novelists of the period.
FRE 208A
19th-Century Literature: Fiction
Consent of Instructor.Graduate standing.
Study of the works of one or several novelists and/or short-story writers of the period. 
FRE 208B
19th-Century Literature: Poetry
Consent of Instructor.Graduate standing.
Study of the works of one or several poets of the period.
FRE 209A
20th-Century: Prose
Consent of Instructor.Graduate standing.
Study of the works of one or several writers of the period.
FRE 209B
20th-Century: Theater
Consent of Instructor.Graduate standing.
Study of the works of one or several dramatists of the period. 
FRE 209C
20th-Century: Poetry
Consent of Instructor.Graduate standing.
Study of the works of one or several poets of the period.
FRE 210
Studies in Narrative Fiction
Consent of Instructor.Graduate standing.

FRE 211
Studies in Criticism
Consent of Instructor.Graduate standing.

FRE 212
Studies in Theater
Consent of Instructor.Graduate standing.

FRE 213
Studies in Poetry
Consent of Instructor.Graduate standing.

FRE 214
Study of a Literary Movement
Consent of Instructor.Graduate standing.

FRE 215
Topics in French & Francophone Film
Consent of Instructor.Graduate standing.
Aspects of French and Francophone film from the Lumire Brothers through the present. Topics may include a specific historical period of filmmaking, film theories and the analysis of film form and narrative, and major filmmakers and filmic traditions.
FRE 224
Francophone Literatures
Consent of Instructor.Graduate standing.
Study of cultural productions (literature,  film, visual arts) by  Francophone peoples  such as found in North Africa, West Africa, the Caribbean, South-East Asia, the Americas, and Metropolitan France.
FRE 250A
French Linguistics I
Consent of Instructor.Graduate standing.
Theoretical approach to the forms and functions of French, with emphasis on phonology and morphology.  Overview of current linguistic theories and their application to French. Offered in alternate years.
FRE 250B
French Linguistics II
Consent of Instructor.Graduate standing.
Theoretical approach to the forms and functions of French, with emphasis on syntax and semantics. Overview of current linguistic theories and their application to French. Offered in alternate years.
FRE 251
Topics in the Linguistic Study of French
Consent of Instructor.Graduate standing.
Questions relevant to the linguistic study of French, such as language acquisition, sociolinguistics, or theoretical examination of structure. Intended for students in French Linguistics and those applying linguistic models to literature or teaching.
FRE 291
Foreign Language Learning in the Classroom
Consent of Instructor.Graduate standing.
Overview of approaches to university-level foreign language instruction and the theoretical notions underlying current trends in classroom practices across commonly taught foreign languages.
FRE 297
Individual Study
Consent of Instructor.Graduate standing.
 
FRE 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.Graduate standing.

FRE 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.Graduate standing.
 
FRE 299D
Dissertation Research
Consent of Instructor.Graduate standing.

FRE 300
Teaching of a Modern Foreign Language
Senior or graduate standing; a major or minor in a modern foreign language.

FRE 390A
The Teaching of French in College
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Designed for graduate teaching assistants with emphasis on problems and procedures encountered by teachers of lower division classes at the university. 
FRE 390B
The Teaching of French in College
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Designed for graduate teaching assistants with emphasis on problems and procedures encountered by teachers of lower division classes at the university.
FRE 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Graduate standing.

FSM 120
Principles of Quantity Food Production
FST 100B;  FST 101B.Restricted to upper division Clinical Nutrition students only.
Fundamental principles of food service management, including quantity food preparation, institutional equipment, receiving and storage, service, menu planning, merchandising, and safety. Students will earn food safety certification.
FSM 120
Principles of Quantity Food Production
FST 100B;  (FST 101B or NUT 106).Restricted to upper division Clinical Nutrition students only.
Fundamental principles of food service management, including quantity food preparation, institutional equipment, receiving and storage, service, menu planning, merchandising, and safety. Students earn food safety certification.
FSM 120L
Quantity Food Production Laboratory
FSM 120.
Laboratory experience in quantity food production and service.
FSM 122
Food Service Systems Management
ARE 112;  FSM 120.
Principles of quantity food production management: production schedules, portion control, financial management, layout and equipment planning, evaluation of alternative systems, and computer applications.
FSM 192
Internship
Consent of Instructor.  One upper division course in Food Service Management (FSM).
Work experience on or off campus in practical aspects of food service management, supervised by a faculty member.
FSM 197T
Tutoring in Food Service Management
Dietetics or related major; completion of the Food Service Management (FSM) course in which tutoring is done.
Tutoring of students in food service management, assistance with discussion groups or laboratory sections; weekly conference with instructor in charge of course; written evaluations.
FST 050
Introduction to Food Preservation
CHE 002A;  BIS 002A (can be concurrent);  (STA 013 (can be concurrent) or STA 013Y (can be concurrent) or STA 100 (can be concurrent)).Pass One restricted to Food Science majors; Pass Two open to all students.
Introduction to modes of fresh food preservation including use of chemicals and microbes, heat and energy, control of water and atmosphere, and by indirect approaches such as packaging, hygienic design and sanitation.
FST 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

FST 100A
Food Chemistry
(CHE 008B or CHE 118B or CHE 128B);  BIS 002A recommended.Open to Food Science, Clinical Nutrition, and Nutrition Science majors only.
Chemical aspects of food composition. Emphasis on the functional properties and chemical reactions of the major components of foods: carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, and water.
FST 100B
Food Properties
FST 100A;  CHE 008B;  and Consent of Instructor.
Sensory quality, chemical and microbial safety, and nutritional properties of foods. Effects of food processing and preparation on these properties. Selected properties of food commodities.
FST 100C
Food Physical Chemistry
FST 100A.
Fundamentals of thermodynamics and kinetics related to food physical chemistry. Phase behavior, crystallization, water activity and food stability, solubility, aroma volatility, formation of glasses, gels and dispersions, biopolymers and rheology.
FST 101A
Food Chemistry Laboratory
FST 100A (can be concurrent).Open to Food Science and Clinical Nutrition majors only.
Study of basic chemical and physical properties that influence the reactivity and functional properties of components in food systems.
FST 101B
Food Properties Laboratory
FST 100B (can be concurrent);  Must be taken concurrently.
Study of properties of food described in FST 100B.
FST 102A
Malting & Brewing Science
(BIS 102,  BIS 103) or BIS 105;  Senior standing recommended.
Technology of the malting, brewing and fermentation processes is integrated with the chemistry, biochemistry and microbiology that determine industrial practices and product quality.
FST 102B
Practical Malting & Brewing
FST 102A;  CHE 002C.Open to seniors only in Fermentation Science or Food Science and Technology. 
Provides practical working knowledge of analytical methods used in malting and brewing and experience with brewing materials and processes, by analysis of samples that illustrate the range of values experienced in practice and pilot scale brewing.
FST 103
Physical & Chemical Methods for Food Analysis
CHE 002C;  CHE 008B;  BIS 103;  FST 100B.
Theory and application of physical and chemical methods for determining the constituents of foods. Modern separation and instrumental analysis techniques are stressed.
FST 104
Food Microbiology
BIS 002A;  BIS 103;  MIC 102.
Microorganisms in food safety, spoilage, and production. Food-borne disease agents and their control. Growth parameters of food spoilage agents. Destruction of microbes in food. Food fermentations. The development of microbes as a resource for the food industry.
FST 104
Food Microbiology
BIS 002A;  BIS 103.
Microorganisms in food safety, spoilage, and production. Food-borne disease agents and their control. Growth parameters of food spoilage agents. Destruction of microbes in food. Food fermentations. The development of microbes as a resource for the food industry.
FST 104L
Food Microbiology Laboratory
BIS 002A;  BIS 103;  FST 104.
Cultural and morphological characteristics of microorganisms involved in food spoilage, in foodborne disease, and food fermentation. Analysis of microbiological quality of foods. May be taught abroad.
FST 106
Food Chemistry for Clinical Nutrition
CHE 008B C- or better or CHE 118B C- or better or CHE 128B C- or better;  concurrent with FST 100A recommended.Only open to Clinical Nutrition majors.
Chemical and physical principles that influence functional properties, nutrient content, safety, and sensory aspects of food. Emphasis on the application of these concepts in clinical nutrition.
FST 107
Food Sensory Science
FST 117 (can be concurrent);  (STA 013 or STA 013Y).
Critical examination of techniques and theories of sensory measurement of food; measures of consumer perception and acceptance. An introduction to the sensory and cognitive systems associated with the perception of food.
FST 109
Principles of Quality Assurance in Food Processing
STA 013 or STA 013Y.
Quality assurance measurement techniques applied to selected food processed products emphasized. Rationale for establishing valid quality assurance programs including selection of samples at critical points. Statistical problems in quality assurance programs used by the food industry.
FST 109
Principles of Quality Assurance in Food Processing
STA 013 or STA 013Y.
Quality assurance systems for food industry with essential measurement & analysis techniques and discussion of QA management & control programs. Regulations and audit, as well as the processes for validation and verification of quality of food systems, are emphasized.
FST 110
Food Processing
PHY 007A;  PHY 007B;  PHY 007C (can be concurrent);  (MAT 016C or MAT 017C or MAT 021C).
Application of the conservation of mass and energy to food processing. Elements of engineering thermodynamics, fluid mechanics, heat and mass transfer. Quantitative analysis through problem solving and simulation.
FST 110L
Food Processing Laboratory
FST 110 (can be concurrent).Open to Food Science majors only.
Laboratory exercises to gain experience with common food processing operations at the bench and pilot plant scales.
FST 114
Fermented Foods
BIS 103;  MIC 102;  or Consent of Instructor.Pass One restricted to upper division or graduate level Food Science and Viticulture & Enology majors. 
Physiology, biochemistry, and genetics of microorganisms important in food fermentations. How microorganisms are used in fermentations and how raw materials are converted into finished fermented foods and beverages.
FST 115
Fermented Foods
BIS 103;  MIC 102;  or Consent of Instructor.Pass One restricted to upper division or graduate level Food Science and Viticulture & Enology majors. 
Physiology, biochemistry, and genetics of microorganisms important in food fermentations. How microorganisms are used in fermentations and how raw materials are converted into finished fermented foods and beverages.
FST 115
Fermented Foods
BIS 103;  MIC 102;  or Consent of Instructor.Pass One restricted to upper division or graduate level Food Science and Viticulture & Enology majors. 
Physiology, biochemistry, and genetics of microorganisms important in food fermentations. How microorganisms are used in fermentations and how raw materials are converted into finished fermented foods and beverages.
FST 117
Design & Analysis for Sensory Food Science
STA 013.
Methods of design and analysis for sensory food science. Experimental design strategies. Use of taste panels and consumer testing. Data analysis and computation including the relative merits and limitations of parametric and nonparametic approaches. Modifications for quality assurance.
FST 119
Chemistry & Technology of Milk & Dairy Products
BIS 002A;  BIS 102;  Consent of Instructor.
Composition, structure and properties of milk and products derived from milk. Relates chemical, microbiological, and technological principles to commercial practices in processing of milk and its products.
FST 123
Introduction to Enzymology
FST 123L (can be concurrent);  BIS 102;  BIS 103.
Principles of physical, chemical and catalytic properties of enzymes and their importance. Purification, characterization, and quantitative evaluation of reaction conditions on activity are stressed. Specificity and mechanism of action illustrated by use of selected enzymes. (Former course BCP 123.)
FST 123L
Enzymology Laboratory 
BIS 103;  FST 123 (can be concurrent);  FST 123 required concurrently.
Laboratory procedures involved in detection, purification and characterization of enzymes. (Former course BCP 123L.)
FST 127
Sensory Evaluation of Foods
FST 117.
Critical examination of methods of sensory measurement applied to food and beverage systems; descriptive analysis and consumer tests and their application to quality assurance, product development and optimization.
FST 128
Food Toxicology
BIS 102;  BIS 103.
Chemistry and biochemistry of toxins occurring in foods, including plant and animal toxins, intentional and unintentional food additives. Theassessment of food safety and toxic hazards.
FST 131
Food Packaging
CHE 008B;  BIS 001B;  PHY 007C.Limited to 50 students.
Principles of food packaging. Functions of packaging. Properties of metal, glass, paper and plastic materials and packages. Design, fabrication, and applications of food packaging. Packaging of fresh and processed foods, including fruits and vegetables, dairy foods, beer and wine.
FST 151Y
Food Freezing
FST 110A;  Or the equivalent.
Mechanisms of ice crystallization, interpretation of freezing diagrams, and modes of heat transfer. Food properties at sub-freezing temperatures, refrigeration requirements, and estimation of freezing times. Industrial systems used in freezing foods.
FST 159
New Food Product Ideas
FST 050;  BIS 002A;  PHY 007A;  PHY 007B;  PHY 007C;  CHE 002A;  CHE 002B;  CHE 002C.
Create, refine, test and present viable ideas for new food products. Activities include trend monitoring, consumer research, idea generation, concept screening, and new product concept presentations. 
FST 160
Food Product Development
FST 050;  FST 103;  FST 104;  FST 110.
Product implementation stage of food product development includingpreliminary product description, prototype development, product testing, and formal presentation of a new product development.
FST 190
Senior Seminar
Senior standing or consent of instructor.
Selected topics presented by students on recent advances in food science and technology. Reports and discussions concerning oral and written presentations, literature sources and career opportunities.
FST 192
Internship for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.
Work experience on or off campus in the practical application of food science.
FST 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.
FST 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

FST 201
Food Chemistry & Biochemistry
Undergraduate courses in organic chemistry and biochemistry; undergraduate course in food chemistry is recommended.Restricted to Food Science graduate level standing or consent of instructor.
Advanced topics in food chemistry and biochemistry, emphasizing the application of the basic principles of chemistry and biochemistry to food composition, properties, preservation and processing. Chemical structures, interactions, reaction mechanisms and experimental methods are stressed.
FST 202
Physical Chemistry of Foods
CHE 107A;  CHE 107B;  BIS 102 recommended.
Fundamental principles of chemistry and physics are applied to a study of changes in water binding properties and activity, changes in proteins, nutrients, toxic constituents, and other compounds during storage, heating, freezing, dehydrating, and concentrating of food materials.
FST 203
Food Processing
FST 110A;  PHY 007C);  CHE 107B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Principles of food engineering applied to food processing. Relationship of Newtonian and non-Newtonian fluid properties to heat and momentum transfer. Application of mass transfer in controlling kinetics and quality changes of foods.
FST 204
Advanced Food Microbiology
Undergraduate level coursework in microbiology, or consent of instructor.
Principles and recent developments in food microbiology. Mechanisms of foodborne disease, pathogen detection, parameters of microbial growth and control in foods, intestinal microbiology including probiotics and prebiotics, and the microbiology of food and beverage fermentations. 
FST 205
Industrial Microbiology
BIS 001A;  BIS 102;  BIS 103;  MIC 130A and MIC 130B or BIS 101 recommended.
Use of microorganisms for producing substances such as amino acids,peptides, enzymes, antibiotics and organic acids. Emphasis on metabolic regulation of pathways leading to fermentation products, on yeast fermentations, and on genetic manipulations (including recombinant DNA techniques) of industrial microorganisms.
FST 207
Advanced Sensory-Instrumental Analyses
FST 107;  and Consent of Instructor.
Basic principles of measurement of color, texture, and flavor of foods by sensory and instrumental methods. Advanced statistical analysis of relation of colorimetry, texturometry, and chemistry of volatile compounds to perception of appearance, texture, flavor.
FST 210
Proteins: Functional Activities & Interactions
BIS 103.
Relationships of structure of proteins to their biological functions. Structural proteins, complexing proteins, and catalytic proteins in plant and animal materials and products.
FST 211
Lipids: Chemistry & Nutrition
BIS 103;  CHE 107B;  CHE 128B.
Chemistry of lipids as it pertains to research in food and nutrition. Relations between lipid structure and their physical properties in tissues and foods. Regulation of absorption, transport, and metabolism of lipids. Implications of dietary fats and health.
FST 213
Flavor Chemistry of Foods & Beverages
CHE 008B;  VEN 123;  (VEN 123L or FST 103);  or Consent of Instructor.
Become familiar with basic principles of flavor chemistry, analysis, and formation in fresh and processed foods. Required to read and critically evaluate flavor chemistry literature.
FST 217
Advanced Food Sensory Science
FST 107 (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.
Advanced study of the techniques and theory of the sensory measurement of food as an analytical tool and as a measure of consumer perception and acceptance. Advanced examination of the sensory and cognitive systems associated with the perception of food.
FST 219
Biochemistry, Microbiology & Technology of Cheeses of the World
FST 119;  (BIS 103 or FST 100A);  FST 123;  BIS 103;  CHE 107B;  CHE 128B;  or Consent of Instructor.Restricted to graduate level students or senior undergraduate students with appropriate background in biochemistry and microbiology.
Compositional and physico-chemical aspects of milk and their implications on cheesemaking; enzymatic, microbiological and physical aspects of cheesemaking; cheese as a biological composite; designing cheese quality attributes; cheese aging. Cheese from all over the world tasted and discussed.
FST 227
Food Perception & the Chemical Senses
FST 107B (can be concurrent);  and Consent of Instructor.
Examination of the anatomy and physiology of the chemical senses (taste, smell, and the trigeminal senses) and how they are involved in the perception of food and food intake.
FST 230
Food & Gut Microbiota 
Microbiology and molecular biology undergraduate coursework or Consent of Instructor.Upper division or graduate standing.
Impact of specific food structures on the structure and function of the animal gut microbiota. How food is transformed by, and modulates, the gut microbiota to provide the host with nutrients and protection. 
FST 290C
Advanced Research Conference
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Critical presentation and evaluation of original research by graduate students. Planning of research programs and proposals. Discussion led by individual major instructors for their research group.
FST 291
Advanced Food Science Seminar
FST 290;  Completion of at least one quarter of FST 290.
Oral presentation of student's original research, discussion, and critical evaluation.
FST 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

FST 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Graduate standing.

GAS 192
Internship in Gastroenterology
Upper division standing; approval of project by preceptor prior to internship.
Supervised work experience in gastroenterology.
GAS 460
Gastroenterology Clinical Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of third-year of medical school.
Work-up, manage, and follow-up new patients on active inpatient consulting service. Gastroenterology/Hepatology patients. Daily rounds with attending physician.
GAS 480
Insights in Gastroenterology
Consent of Instructor.  Student in good academic standing.
To gain insight in clinical activities of Gastroenterology Division through attendance at any of the following: endoscopic procedures, ward rounds, outpatient clinic, and G.I. grand rounds.
GAS 499
Research
Consent of Instructor.  Medical student status.
Part-time participation in active clinical and basic research projects. Some will involve both patient care and relevant laboratory procedures. Basic research includes liver metabolism, cancer markers, porphyrias diet and cancer, folate metabolism.
GDB 090
Introduction to Global Disease Biology
Open to GDB majors only, or Consent of Instructor.Open to Global Disease Biology majors only.
Introduction to the Global Disease Biology major, research and internship opportunities, and potential career paths in human, animal, and plant health. Communication, ethics and the nature of science.
GDB 101
Epidemiology
SAS 013;  BIS 002A;  BIS 002B;  BIS 002C;  ((STA 013 or STA 013Y) or (STA 100 or PLS 120)).
Principles and practice of epidemiology as applied to human, animal, and plant populations and the environment in which these populations co-exist. Quantitative analysis of both infectious and non-infectious disease. Inter-dependence between epidemiological analysis, decision-making and policy formulation will be highlighted.
GDB 101
Epidemiology
SAS 013;  BIS 002A;  BIS 002B;  BIS 002C;  ((STA 013 or STA 013Y) or (STA 100 or PLS 120)).Pass One restricted to Global Disease Biology majors only.
Principles and practice of epidemiology as applied to human, animal, and plant populations and the environment in which these populations co-exist. Quantitative analysis of both infectious and non-infectious disease. Inter-dependence between epidemiological analysis, decision-making and policy formulation will be highlighted.
GDB 102
Disease Intervention and Policy 
GDB 101;  SAS 013;  BIS 002A;  BIS 002B;  BIS 002C;  PMI 129Y;  VME 158.
Examination of the prevention and treatment of diseases affecting humans, animals, and plants. Case studies will illustrate the merits of a unified approach to promoting health at local, regional, and global scales.
GDB 102
Disease Intervention & Policy 
GDB 101;  SAS 013;  BIS 002A;  BIS 002B;  BIS 002C;  PMI 129Y;  VME 158.Pass One restricted to Global Disease Biology majors only. 
Examination of the prevention and treatment of diseases affecting humans, animals, and plants. Case studies illustrate the merits of a unified approach to promoting health at local, regional, and global scales.
GDB 103
Microbiome of People, Animals, & Plants 
BIS 002A;  BIS 002B;  BIS 002C.
Examination of the structure and function of microbial communities that live inside and on host organisms. Introduction to general concepts of the microbiome and microbiota, and their relationship to host health and disease.
GDB 187
Global Disease Biology Seminar
GDB 090;  SAS 013.Open to junior standing; Global Disease Biology majors.
Seminar leading to development of the research proposal and academic plan for the Global Disease Biology major. 
GDB 189
Global Disease Biology Senior Research 
GDB 090;  GDB 189D (can be concurrent);  SAS 013;  GBD 189D required concurrently the first time GBD 189 is taken.Restricted to senior standing; Global Disease Biology majors only.
Capstone research experience for the Global Disease Biology major. Project may be experimental, library research, or some other creative activity. 
GDB 189D
Global Disease Biology Research Discussion
GDB 090;  GDB 187;  SAS 013;  GDB 189 (can be concurrent);  GBD 189 required concurrently.Restricted to junior standing; Global Disease Biology majors only.
Course helps prevent or solve problems during the students research activity. Independent advising and assistance on research proposal.
GDB 189D
Global Disease Biology Research Discussion
GDB 090;  GDB 187;  SAS 013;  GDB 189;  or Consent of Instructor.Restricted to junior standing; Global Disease Biology majors only.
Prevent or solve problems during the students research activity. Independent advising and assistance on research proposal.
GEL 002G
Earth System Science Discussion
GEL 002 (can be concurrent);  GEL 002 required concurrently.
Small group discussion and preparation of short papers for GEL 002.
GEL 003
History of Life
GEL 001 recommended.
The history of life during the three and onehalf billion years from its origin to the present day. Origin of life and processes of evolution; how to visualize and understand living organisms from their fossil remains.
GEL 003G
History of Life: Discussion
GEL 003 (can be concurrent);  GEL 003 required concurrently.
Small group discussion and preparation of short papers for GEL 003. GE credit with concurrent enrollment in GEL 003: WE.
GEL 003L
History of Life Laboratory
GEL 003 (can be concurrent);  GEL 003 required concurrently.
Exercises in understanding fossils as the clues to interpreting ancient life, including their functional morphology, paleoecology, and evolution.
GEL 009
Geology Field Experience
Consent of Instructor.  At least one previous GEL class, or concurrent enrollment.Pass One open to non-Geology Majors only. 
Exposure to geologic features and earth processes in the field. Experiential instruction in earth-science concepts, spatial visualization, landscape evolution, deep time, critical thinking skills, and integrative scientific themes. One 4-5 day field trip.   
GEL 016G
The Oceans: Discussion
GEL 016 (can be concurrent).
Scientific method applied to discovery of the processes, biota and history of the oceans. Group discussion and preparation of term paper.
GEL 030
Fractals, Chaos and Complexity
MAT 016A or MAT 021A.
Modern ideas about the unifying ideas of fractal geometry, chaos and complexity. Basic theory and applications with examples from physics, earth sciences, mathematics, population dynamics, ecology, history, economics, biology, computer science, art and architecture. Offered in alternate years.
GEL 030
Fractals, Chaos & Complexity
MAT 016A or MAT 017A or MAT 021A.
Modern ideas about the unifying ideas of fractal geometry, chaos and complexity. Basic theory and applications with examples from physics, earth sciences, mathematics, population dynamics, ecology, history, economics, biology, computer science, art and architecture. Offered in alternate years.
GEL 050
Physical Geology 
High school physics and chemistry.
The Earth, its materials, its internal and external processes, its development through time by sea-floor spreading and global plate tectonics. 
GEL 050L
Physical Geology Laboratory
GEL 050 (can be concurrent).
Introduction to classification and recognition of minerals and rocks and to interpretation of topographic and geologic maps and aerial photographs. 
GEL 053
Introduction to Geobiology
GEL 001 or GEL 002 or GEL 050.
Introduction to interactions between Earth and life with an emphasis on how metabolism, cellular processes, evolution and ecology emerged within natural environments and have changed Earths surface.
GEL 055
Introduction to Geochemistry
(GEL 001 or GEL 002 or GEL 050);  (CHE 002A or CHE 002AH);  (CHE 002B or CHE 002BH).
Introduction to key geochemical principles in Earth & Planetary Sciences; chemical bonding, geochemical affinity of elements, redox & acid base equilibria in geological systems, radioactive decay, isotopic fractionation and paleoclimate records.
GEL 056
Introduction to Geophysics
(GEL 001 or GEL 050);  (PHY 007B or PHY 009B).
Introduction to geophysical topics essential to all aspects of Earth and planetary sciences: theory of plate tectonics, gravitational field of planets, diffusion, rheology, seismology, and earthquakes.
GEL 060
Earth Materials: Introduction
CHE 002A;  (MAT 016A or MAT 017A or MAT 021A);  (GEL 001 or GEL 050,  GEL 050L).
Physical and chemical properties of rocks, minerals and other earth materials; structure and composition of rock-forming minerals; formation of minerals by precipitation from silicate liquids and aqueous fluids and by solid state transformations.
GEL 060
Earth Materials: Introduction
(CHE 002A or CHE 002AH);  (MAT 016A or MAT 017A or MAT 021A);  (GEL 001 or GEL 050);  GEL 050L.
Physical and chemical properties of Earth materials; structure, chemical composition, and identification of rock-forming minerals; mineral-rock associations, and their origin from silicate liquids, aqueous fluids, and solid state transformations.
GEL 062
Optical Mineralogy
GEL 060 (can be concurrent).
Optical properties of inorganic crystals; techniques of mineral identification using the polarizing microscope; strategies for studying rocks in thin section.
GEL 092
Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.
Work-learn experience on and off campus in all subject areas offered by the department.  Internships supervised by a member of the faculty.
GEL 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study.
GEL 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.
Special study for undergraduates.
GEL 101
Structural Geology
GEL 050;  GEL 050L;  (PHY 007A or PHY 009A);  (MAT 016A or MAT 017A or MAT 021A);  Consent of Instructor.Limited to 35 students.
Study of processes and products of rock deformation. Introduction to structural geology through a survey of the features and geometries of faults and folds, techniques of strain analysis, and continuum mechanics of rock deformation.
GEL 101L
Structural Geology Lab
GEL 050;  GEL 050L;  (PHY 007A or PHY 009A);  GEL 101 (can be concurrent);  Consent of Instructor.Limited to 15 students per session.
Laboratory study of the processes and products of rock deformation. Introduction to the practice of structural geology through observations and analysis of rock deformation, including field measurement techniques and geologic mapping.
GEL 103
Field Geology
GEL 101L;  GEL 101;  Consent of Instructor.
Field mapping projects and writing geological reports. Weekly classroom meetings devoted to preparation of maps, cross sections, stratigraphic sections, rock descriptions, and reports. Seven-eight days on weekends during quarter. 
GEL 103
Field Geology
GEL 101;  GEL 101L.
Field mapping projects and writing geological reports. Weekly classroom meetings devoted to preparation of maps, cross sections, stratigraphic sections, rock descriptions, and reports. Seven-eight days for field trips will occur on weekends during the quarter.
GEL 105
Earth Materials: Igneous Rocks
GEL 060;  GEL 062;  (MAT 016A or MAT 017A or MAT 021A);  CHE 002B (can be concurrent).
Origin and occurrence of igneous rocks. Laboratory exercises emphasize the study of these rocks in hand specimen and thin section.
GEL 105
Earth Materials: Igneous Rocks
GEL 060;  (MAT 016A or MAT 017A or MAT 021A);  CHE 002B (can be concurrent).
Origin and occurrence of igneous rocks. Laboratory exercises emphasize the study of these rocks in hand specimen and thin section.
GEL 106
Earth Materials: Metamorphic Rocks
GEL 105.
Physical and chemical properties of metamorphic rocks; interpretation of metamorphic environments. Laboratory exercises emphasize the study of these rocks in hand specimen and thin section.
GEL 107
Earth History: Paleobiology
GEL 003 or BIS 002A or BIS 010.
Evolution and ecological structure of the biosphere from the origin of life to the present.
GEL 107
Earth History: Paleobiology
GEL 003 or GEL 053 or BIS 002A or BIS 010.
Evolution and ecological structure of the biosphere from the origin of life to the present.
GEL 107
Earth History: Paleobiology
GEL 003 or GEL 053 or BIS 002A or BIS 002B.
Evolution and ecological structure of the biosphere from the origin of life to the present.
GEL 107L
Earth History: Paleobiology Laboratory
(GEL 003,  GEL 003L) or BIS 002B;  GEL 107 (can be concurrent).
Exercises in determining the ecological functions and evolution of individuals, populations, and communities of fossil organisms in field and laboratory.
GEL 107L
Earth History: Paleobiology Laboratory
(GEL 003,  GEL 003L) or GEL 053 or BIS 002B;  GEL 107 (can be concurrent).
Exercises in determining the ecological functions and evolution of individuals, populations, and communities of fossil organisms in field and laboratory.
GEL 107L
Earth History: Paleobiology Laboratory
GEL 107 (can be concurrent).
Exercises in determining the ecological functions and evolution of individuals, populations, and communities of fossil organisms in field and laboratory.
GEL 108
Earth History: Paleoclimates
(GEL 001 or GEL 050 or GEL 116N or ESP 116N);  CHE 002A;  Consent of Instructor.
Geological and environmental factors controlling climate change, the greenhouse effect with a detailed analysis of the history of Earth's climate fluctuations over the last 600 million years. Past and present climate records are used to examine potential future climatic scenarios.
GEL 109
Earth History: Sediments and Strata
GEL 050;  GEL 050L.
Principles of stratigraphic and sedimentologic analysis. Evaluation of historical and modern global changes in sedimentation within terrestrial and marine environments. Examination of the plate tectonic, climatic and oceanographic factors controlling the distribution and exploitation of economic fluids within sedimentary rocks.
GEL 109
Earth History: Sediments & Strata
(GEL 001 or GEL 050);  GEL 050L.
Sediment formation, transport, and deposition. Interpretations of sedimentary processes across landscapes and through time in the context of environmental and geological problems. Reconstruction of ancient environmental change from sedimentary rocks.
GEL 109L
Earth History: Sediments & Strata Laboratory
GEL 109 (can be concurrent).
Methods of stratigraphic and sedimentologic analysis of modern and ancient sediments. Identification of major sediment and sedimentary rock types. Outcrop and subsurface analysis of sedimentary basins. GE credit with concurrent enrollment in GEL 109. Includes four one-day field trips.
GEL 110
Summer Field Geology
GEL 060;  GEL 103;  GEL 109;  GEL 105 recommended.
Advanced application of geologic and geophysical field methods to the study of rocks. Includes development and interpretation of geologic maps and cross sections; gravity, magnetic, electrical resistivity and seismic surveys; and field analysis of plutonic and volcanic rock suites. Eight hours/day, six days/week for six weeks.
GEL 110
Summer Field Geology
GEL 060;  GEL 103;  GEL 109;  GEL 105 recommended.
Advanced application of geologic and geophysical field methods to the study of rocks. Includes development and interpretation of geologic maps and cross sections; gravity, magnetic, electrical resistivity and seismic surveys; and field analysis of plutonic and volcanic rock suites. Eight hours/day, six days/week for six weeks.
GEL 110A
Summer Field Geology: Structures & Neotectonics
GEL 060;  GEL 103;  GEL 109.
Advanced application of geologic field methods to the study of deformed rocks and their interpretation in terms of tectonic processes. Includes development and interpretation of geologic maps, cross sections and stratigraphic sections. Six days/week for three weeks in an off-campus location. 
GEL 110B
Summer Field Geology: Volcanology
GEL 105;  GEL 109.
Advanced application of geologic field methods to the study of volcanic and plutonic rocks and their interpretation in terms of igneous processes. Includes development and interpretation of geologic maps, cross sections, stratigraphic sections, and outcrop scale observations. Six days/week for three weeks in an off-campus location.
GEL 110C
Summer Field Geology: Special Projects
Consent of Instructor.
Advanced application of geologic field methods to a special project location and the interpretation of field observations in terms of its geologic processes and geologic history. Variable field location and specific activities. Six days/week for three weeks in an off-campus location.  
GEL 115
Earth Science, History, & People
GEL 001 or GEL 050.
Study of interplay between the Earth and its human inhabitants through history, including consideration of acute events such as earthquakes and eruptions as well as the geology of resources, topography, and water.
GEL 116N
Oceanography
GEL 001 or GEL 002 or GEL 016 or GEL 050.
Advanced oceanographic topics: Chemical, physical, geological, and biological processes; research methods and data analysis;  marine resources, anthropogenic impacts, and climate change; integrated earth/ocean/atmosphere systems; weekly lab and one weekend field trip.
GEL 130
Non-Renewable Natural Resources
GEL 001 or GEL 050.
Origin, occurrence, and distribution of non-renewable resources, including metallic, nonmetallic, and energy-producing materials. Problems of discovery, production, and management. Estimations and limitations of reserves, and their sociological, political, and economic effects.
GEL 132
Introductory Inorganic Geochemistry
GEL 060 (can be concurrent);  CHE 002B.
Nucleosynthesis of chemical elements, physical and chemical properties of elements, ionic substitution, elemental partition, distribution and transport among planetary materials, basic thermodynamics and phase diagrams, isotopic geochronometers, stable isotope fractionation, mixing and dilution, advection and diffusion, geochemical cycles.
GEL 133
Environmental Geochemistry
CHE 002A;  CHE 002B.
Introduction to Earth surface processes with a focus on topics of current environmental interest such as nuclear power and waste disposal, acid mine drainage, carbon sequestration, history of polar ice sheets and sea level change.
GEL 134
Environmental Geology & Land Use Planning
GEL 001 or GEL 050;  Consent of Instructor.  One course in Geology (GEL).
Geologic aspects of land use and development planning. Geologic problems concerning volcanic and earthquake hazards, land stability, floods, erosion, coastal hazards, non-renewable resource extraction, waste disposal, water resources.
GEL 136
Ecogeomorphology of Rivers & Streams
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division or graduate standing in any physical science, biological science, or engineering.Restricted to advanced students in the physical sciences, biological sciences, or engineering.
Integrative multidisciplinary field analysis of streams. Class project examines hydrology, geomorphology, water quality and aquatic and riparian ecology of degraded and pristine stream systems. Includes cooperative two-week field survey in remote wilderness settings with students from diverse scientific backgrounds.   
GEL 138
Introductory Volcanology
GEL 060;  GEL 109;  Consent of Instructor.
Principles of physical and chemical volcanology. Taught in a volcanically active setting (e.g., Hawaii) with a strong field component.
GEL 139
Rivers: Form, Function and Management
GEL 050 or GEL 050L;  MAT 016B or 021B recommended.
Analysis of river form and processes, emphasis on fluvial geomorphology, and river and stream restoration; case studies to illustrate concepts and applications. Two weekend field trips required. Offered irregularly. 
GEL 139
Rivers: Form, Function & Management
GEL 050 or GEL 050L;  MAT 016B or MAT 017B or MAT 021B recommended.
Analysis of river form and processes, emphasis on fluvial geomorphology, and river and stream restoration; case studies to illustrate concepts and applications. Two weekend field trips required. Offered irregularly. 
GEL 140
Introduction to Process Geomorphology
(GEL 001 or GEL 050);  (MAT 016B or MAT 021B).
Quantitative description and interpretation of landscapes with emphasis on the relationships between physical processes, mass conservation, and landform evolution. Topics covered include physical and chemical weathering, hillslopes, debris flows, fluvial systems, alluvial fans, pedogenesis, eolian transport, glaciation and Quaternary geochronology.
GEL 140
Introduction to Process Geomorphology
(GEL 001 or GEL 050);  (MAT 016B or MAT 017B or MAT 021B).
Quantitative description and interpretation of landscapes with emphasis on the relationships between physical processes, mass conservation, and landform evolution. Topics covered include physical & chemical weathering, hillslopes, debris flows, fluvial systems, alluvial fans, pedogenesis, eolian transport, glaciation and Quaternary geochronology.
GEL 141
Evolutionary History of Vertebrates
GEL 003 or BIS 002A.
Evolutionary history of vertebrates; fossil record and phylogeny; timing of major evolutionary events; appearance of major vertebrate groups; physical constraints in vertebrate evolution; paleobiogeography of vertebrates; effect of continental movement on vertebrate evolution; dinosaurs and other strange vertebrates. Offered in alternate years.
GEL 141
Evolutionary History of Vertebrates
GEL 003 or GEL 053 or BIS 002A.
Evolutionary history of vertebrates; fossil record and phylogeny; timing of major evolutionary events; appearance of major vertebrate groups; physical constraints in vertebrate evolution; paleobiogeography of vertebrates; effect of continental movement on vertebrate evolution; dinosaurs and other strange vertebrates. Offered in alternate years.
GEL 141L
Evolutionary History of Vertebrates Laboratory
GEL 141 (can be concurrent).
Augments lecture GEL 141 through handling of specimens enabling in-person examination of three dimensional features observed in vertebrate skeletons, both fossil and living. Offered in alternate years.
GEL 142
Basin Analysis
GEL 050;  GEL 050L;  GEL 109.
Analysis of sedimentary basins from initiation to maturity, including controls on sedimentary fill, subsidence analysis, sequence stratigraphy, core logs, and applications to petroleum exploration and hydrology. One two-day field trip. Offered irregularly.
GEL 143
Advanced Igneous Petrology
GEL 105;  (MAT 016C or MAT 021C);  CHE 002C.
Physical and chemical properties of magmatic environments and processes of igneous rock formation. Laboratory study of representative igneous rocks. Offered irregularly.
GEL 143
Advanced Igneous Petrology
GEL 105;  (MAT 016C or MAT 017C or MAT 021C);  (CHE 002C or GEL 055).
Physical and chemical properties of magmatic environments and processes of igneous rock formation. Laboratory study of representative igneous rocks. Offered irregularly.
GEL 144
Historical Ecology
Upper division course in environmental science or ecology, or an introductory course in paleobiology.
Ancient ecosystems and the factors that caused them to change. Species, expansion, evolution of new modes of life, geologically induced variations in resource supply, and extinction provide historical perspective on the biosphere of future.
GEL 145
Advanced Metamorphic Petrology
GEL 106;  (HYD 134 or CHE 002C);  (MAT 016C or MAT 021C).
Metamorphic processes and the origin of metamorphic rocks. Laboratory study of representative rock suites. Offered irregularly.
GEL 145
Advanced Metamorphic Petrology
GEL 106;  (HYD 134 or CHE 002C or GEL 055);  (MAT 016C or MAT 017C or MAT 021C).
Metamorphic processes and the origin of metamorphic rocks. Laboratory study of representative rock suites. Offered irregularly.
GEL 146
Radiogenic Isotope Geochemistry & Cosmochemistry
CHE 002C;  PHY 007C;  MAT 016C.
Basic principles of nuclear chemistry and physics applied to geology to determine the ages of terrestrial rocks, meteorites, archeological objects, age of the Earth, to trace geological/environmental processes, and explain formation of the chemical elements in the Universe. Offered irregularly.
GEL 147
Geology of Ore Deposits
(CHE 002C or HYD 134);  GEL 060;  GEL 062;  GEL 105.
Tectonic, lithologic and geochemical setting of major metallic ore deposit types emphasizing ore deposit genesis, water/rock interaction and the environmental effects of mining. Offered irregularly.
GEL 148
Stable Isotopes & Geochemical Tracers
(CHE 002C or HYD 134);  GEL 050;  GEL 050L;  GEL 060.
Use of oxygen and hydrogen isotopes in defining hydrologic processes; carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur isotopes as indicators of exchange between the lithosphere, hydrosphere, atmosphere and biosphere. Radiogenic, cosmogenic, and noble gas isotope tracers. Offered irregularly.
GEL 149
Geothermal Systems
GEL 050;  GEL 050L;  CHE 002B.
Geology, geochemistry, and geophysics of geothermal systems, including electrical power generation and direct use applications. Includes one day field trip on a weekend during the quarter. Offered irregularly.
GEL 150A
Physical and Chemical Oceanography
(ESP 116N or GEL 116N);  PHY 009B;  MAT 021D;  CHE 002C;  and Consent of Instructor.
Physical and chemical properties of seawater, fluid dynamics, air-sea interaction, currents, waves, tides, mixing, major oceanic geochemical cycles.
GEL 150A
Physical & Chemical Oceanography
(ESP 116N or GEL 116N);  (PHY 007B or PHY 009B);  (MAT 016C or MAT 017C or MAT 021C);  (CHE 002C or GEL 055);  and Consent of Instructor.
Physical and chemical properties of seawater, fluid dynamics, air-sea interaction, currents, waves, tides, mixing, major oceanic geochemical cycles.
GEL 150B
Geological Oceanography
GEL 050 or (GEL 116N or ESP 116N).
Introduction to the origin and geologic evolution of ocean basins. Composition and structure of oceanic crust; marine volcanism; and deposition of marine sediments. Interpretation of geologic history of the ocean floor in terms of sea-floor spreading theory.
GEL 150C
Biological Oceanography
BIS 002A;  Consent of Instructor.  A course in general ecology.
Ecology of major marine habitats, including intertidal, shelf benthic, deep-sea and plankton communities. Existing knowledge and contemporary issues in research. Segment devoted to human use. One weekend field trip required. 
GEL 152
Paleobiology of Protista
GEL 107 or BIS 002A;  Consent of Instructor.
Morphology, systematics, evolution, and ecology of single-celled organisms that are preserved in the fossil record. Offered irregularly.
GEL 156
Hydrogeology & Contaminant Transport
HYD 145;  ECI 144;  Or equivalent of ECI 144.
Physical and chemical processes affecting groundwater flow and contaminant transport, with emphasis on realistic hydrogeologic systems. Groundwater geology and chemistry. Fundamentals of groundwater flow and transport analysis. Laboratory includes field pumping test and work with physical and computer models.
GEL 156
Hydrogeology & Contaminant Transport
HYD 144 or ECI 144;  Or the equivalent.
Physical and chemical processes affecting groundwater flow and contaminant transport, with emphasis on realistic hydrogeologic systems. Groundwater geology and chemistry. Fundamentals of groundwater flow and transport analysis. Laboratory includes field pumping test and work with physical and computer models.
GEL 160
Geological Data Analysis
MAT 021A.
Introduction to quantitative methods in analyzing geological data including basic principles of statistics and probability, error analysis, hypothesis testing, inverse theory, time series analysis and directional data analyses.  Use of computer in lectures and homework.
GEL 160
Geological Data Analysis
MAT 016A or MAT 017A or MAT 021A.
Introduction to quantitative methods in analyzing geological data including basic principles of statistics and probability, error analysis, hypothesis testing, inverse theory, time series analysis and directional data analyses.
GEL 161
Geophysical Field Methods
MAT 021C;  (GEL 001 or GEL 050);  (PHY 007C or PHY 009C).
Geophysical methods applied to determining subsurface structure in tectonics, hydrogeology, geotechnical engineering, hydrocarbon and mineral exploration. Theory, survey design and interpretation of gravity, electrical resistivity, electromagnetic, reflection and refraction seismology, and ground-penetrating radar measurements. 
GEL 161
Geophysical Field Methods
(GEL 001 or GEL 050);  (MAT 016C or MAT 017C or MAT 021C);  (PHY 007C or PHY 009C or GEL 056).
Geophysical methods applied to determining subsurface structure in tectonics, hydrogeology, geotechnical engineering, hydrocarbon and mineral exploration. Theory, survey design & interpretation of gravity, electrical resistivity, electromagnetic, reflection & refraction seismology, and ground-penetrating radar measurements. 
GEL 162
Geophysics of the Solid Earth
MAT 021C;  (PHY 007C or PHY 009C);  Consent of Instructor.
Theory and use of physics in the study of the solid earth. Gravity, magnetism, paleomagnetism, and heat flow. Application to the interpretation of the regional and large-scale structure of the earth and to plate tectonics. Offered irregularly.
GEL 162
Geophysics of the Solid Earth
(MAT 016C or MAT 017C or MAT 021C);  (PHY 007C or PHY 009C or GEL 056);  Consent of Instructor.
Theory and use of physics in the study of the solid earth. Gravity, magnetism, paleomagnetism, and heat flow. Application to the interpretation of the regional and large-scale structure of the earth and to plate tectonics. Offered irregularly.
GEL 163
Planetary Geology & Geophysics
(GEL 001 or GEL 002 or GEL 028 or GEL 036 or GEL 050 or AST 010G or AST 010L or AST 010S or AST 025);  (MAT 016A or MAT 017A or MAT 021A);  (PHY 007A or PHY 009A);  or High School Physics.
Principles of planetary science. Planetary dynamics, including orbital mechanics, tidal interactions and ring dynamics. Theory of planetary interiors, gravitational fields, rotational dynamics. Physics of planetary atmospheres. Geological processes, landforms and their modification. Methods of analysis from Earth-based observations and spacecraft.
GEL 175
 Advanced Field Geology 
Consent of Instructor.
Advanced field studies of selected geologic terrains, interpretation and discussion of field observations. Offered irregularly.
GEL 181
Teaching in Science & Mathematics
Consent of Instructor.  Major in mathematics, science, or engineering; or completion of a one-year sequence of science or calculus.Limited to 40 students per section.
Exploration of effective teaching practices based on examination of how middle school students learn math and science. Selected readings, discussion and field experience in middle school classrooms. 
GEL 182
Field Studies in Marine Geochemistry
Consent of Instructor.
Marine geochemistry with the opportunity of going to sea or into the field on land. Techniques of sea-floor mapping using bottom photography, marine geochemical sampling, and method of data reduction and sample analysis. Analysis of data/samples collected. Offered irregularly.
GEL 183
Teaching High School Mathematics & Science 
Major in mathematics, science, or engineering; or completion of a one-year sequence of science or calculus and consent of the instructor.Limited to 40 students per section.
Exploration and creation of effective teaching practices based on examination of how high school students learn mathematics and science. Field experience in high school classrooms.
GEL 192
Internship in Geology 
Upper division standing; project approval prior to internship.
Supervised work experience in geology.
GEL 194A
Senior Thesis
Open to Geology majors who have completed 135 units and who do not qualify for the Honors Program.
Guided independent study of a selected topic, leading to the writing of a senior thesis.
GEL 194B
Senior Thesis
Open to Geology majors who have completed 135 units and who do not qualify for the Honors Program.
Guided independent study of a selected topic, leading to the writing of a senior thesis.
GEL 194HA
Senior Honors Project
Open to Geology majors who have completed 135 units and who qualify for the Honors Program.
Guided independent study of a selected topic, leading to the writing of an honors thesis.
GEL 194HB
Senior Honors Project
Open to Geology majors who have completed 135 units and who qualify for the Honors Program.
Guided independent study of a selected topic, leading to the writing of an honors thesis.
GEL 198
Directed Group Study
Senior standing in Geology or consent of instructor.
Group study focused on topics in Geology.
GEL 205
Advanced Field Stratigraphy
GEL 109;  GEL 110;  or Consent of Instructor.  GEL 206 recommended.
Fieldwork over spring break. Application of stratigraphic techniques to research problems. Collection, compilation, and interpretation of field data. Integration of data with models for deposition and interpretations of Earth history. Topics will vary. Offered irregularly.
GEL 206
Stratigraphic Analysis
GEL 109;  GEL 109L;  or Consent of Instructor.  GEL 144 recommended.
Topics in advanced methods of stratigraphic analysis, regional stratigraphy and sedimentation, and sedimentary basin analysis. Emphasis on techniques used to interpret stratigraphic record and on current issues in stratigraphy and sedimentation. Offered irregularly.
GEL 214
Active Tectonics
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Active deformation associated with faults, landslides, and volcanoes. Geodetic measurement techniques such as triangulation, trilateration, leveling, Global Positioning System (GPS), and radar interferometry. GPS data acquisition and analysis. Inversion of geodetic data and mechanical models of crustal deformation. Offered irregularly.
GEL 216
Tectonics
GEL 101;  or Consent of Instructor.
Nature and evolution of tectonic features of the Earth. Causes, consequences, and evolution of plate motion, with selected examples from the Earth's deformed belts. Offered irregularly.
GEL 217
Topics in Geophysics
Consent of Instructor.
Discussion and evaluation of current research in a given area of geophysics. Topic will change from year to year. Offered in alternate years.
GEL 218
Analysis of Structures in Deformed Rocks
GEL 100;  GEL 100L;  GEL 101;  GEL 101L;  GEL 170; or Consent of Instructor.
Recent advances in the understanding and analysis of structures in brittlely and ductilely deformed rocks. Detailed investigation of the characteristics of the structures, models for their formation, and applications to inferring the kinematics of larger scale tectonics.  Offered irregularly.
GEL 218
Analysis of Structures in Deformed Rocks
GEL 101;  GEL 101L;  or Consent of Instructor.
Recent advances in the understanding and analysis of structures in brittlely and ductilely deformed rocks. Detailed investigation of the characteristics of the structures, models for their formation, and applications to inferring the kinematics of larger scale tectonics.  Offered irregularly.
GEL 219
Fracture and Flow of Rocks
GEL 100;  GEL 101;  or Consent of Instructor.
Origins of those structures in rocks associated with brittle and ductile deformation. Theoretical analysis, using continuum mechanics, and experimental evidence for the origin of the structures with emphasis on deformational processes in the earth. Offered irregularly.
GEL 219
Fracture & Flow of Rocks
GEL 101;  or Consent of Instructor.
Origins of those structures in rocks associated with brittle and ductile deformation. Theoretical analysis, using continuum mechanics, and experimental evidence for the origin of the structures with emphasis on deformational processes in the earth. Offered irregularly.
GEL 220
Mechanics of Geologic Structures
MAT 021C;  (PHY 009A;  or PHY 005A); GEL 170; or Consent of Instructor; MAT 021D and MAT 022A recommended.
Development in tensor notation of the balance laws of continuum mechanics, and constitutive theories of elasticity, viscosity, and plasticity and their application to understanding development of geologic structures such as fractures, faults, dikes, folds, foliations,and boudinage. Offered irregularly.
GEL 220
Mechanics of Geologic Structures
PHY 009A;  MAT 021C;  or Consent of Instructor.  MAT 021D and (MAT 022A or MAT 027A or BIS 027A recommended.).
Development in tensor notation of the balance laws of continuum mechanics, and constitutive theories of elasticity, viscosity, and plasticity and their application to understanding development of geologic structures such as fractures, faults, dikes, folds, foliations,and boudinage. Offered irregularly.
GEL 226
Advanced Sedimentary Petrology
GEL 144;  or Consent of Instructor.
Advanced petrography and geochemistry of sediments and sedimentary rocks. Geochemical, textural and mineralogical evolution of sedimentary rocks reflecting depositional or burial processes. Laboratory work emphasizes thin section study of rocks.  Offered irregularly.
GEL 227
Stable Isotopes Biogeochemistry
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Discussion and application of stable isotope techniques for scientific research problems. Emphasizes carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, hydrogen and sulfur isotopes. Laboratory develops basic skills of cryogenic gas extraction and specific techniques for individual research using stable isotopes. Offered irregularly.
GEL 228
Topics in Paleoceanography
GEL 108;  GEL 150A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Critical discussion and review of selected topics in paleoceanography and paleoclimatology relating to the history of the processes controlling and affecting climate change and ocean circulation throughout the geologic record. Topics vary. Offered irregularly.
GEL 230
Geomorphology & River Management
GEL 139;  Or equivalent; graduate standing.
Impacts of management and land use activities on the geomorphology of rivers and streams. Evaluation and use of analytical tools for river assessment. Assessment of river and stream restoration strategies and emerging issues in river management.    
GEL 232
Oceans & Climate Change
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Modern climate change and linkages between the ocean-atmosphere-cryosphere-terrestrial climate system. Importance of the ocean in forcing climate change, and the impacts of anthropogenic processes on the ocean. Topics vary. Offered irregularly.
GEL 235
Surface Processes
GEL 050;  GEL 050L;  GEL 139;  MAT 021B or MAT 016B recommended.
Recent advances in the analysis of landforms and their evolution. Detailed investigation of the tools used to document surface processes. Evaluation of concepts and processes that govern landscape evolution. Offered irregularly.
GEL 235
Surface Processes
GEL 050;  GEL 050L;  MAT 016B or MAT 017B or MAT 021B recommended.
Recent advances in the analysis of landforms and their evolution. Detailed investigation of the tools used to document surface processes. Evaluation of concepts and processes that govern landscape evolution. Offered irregularly.
GEL 236
Inverse Theory in Geology & Geophysics
Consent of Instructor.
Inversion of data for model parameters. Evaluation of parameter uncertainties. Linear and nonlinear problems for discrete and continuous models. Bakus-Gilbert inversion. Offered irregularly.
GEL 238
Theoretical Seismology
Consent of Instructor.
Elastodynamic wave equation. Greens functions and source representations. Ray theory. Plane and spherical waves and boundary conditions. Elastic wave propagation in stratified media.
GEL 240
Geophysics of the Earth
PHY 009B;  MAT 022B.
Physics of the earth's crust, mantle, and core. Laplace's equation and spherical harmonic expression of gravity and magnetic fields. Elastic wave equation in geologic media. Body and surface seismic waves. Equations of state, thermal structure of the earth. Offered irregularly.
GEL 240
Geophysics of the Earth
PHY 009B;  (MAT 022B or MAT 027B or BIS 027B).
Physics of the earth's crust, mantle, and core. Laplace's equation and spherical harmonic expression of gravity and magnetic fields. Elastic wave equation in geologic media. Body and surface seismic waves. Equations of state, thermal structure of the earth. Offered irregularly.
GEL 241
Geomagnetism
Graduate standing.
Nature and origin of the Earth's magnetic field. Present field and recent secular variation. Spherical harmonic analysis. Paleosecular variation. Polarity transitions and geomagnetic excursions. Statistics of polarity intervals. Dynamo theory. Planetary magnetism.  Offered irregularly.
GEL 242
Paleomagnetism
Graduate standing.
Principles and applications of paleomagnetism. Physical basis of rock and mineral magnetism. Field and laboratory techniques. Instrumentation. Analysis of paleomagnetic data. Statistical methods. Rock magnetic properties. Geological and geophysical applications. Offered irregularly.
GEL 246
Physical Chemistry of Metamorphic Processes
GEL 145;  CHE 110A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Physiochemical principles of metamorphic mineral assemblages and methods of interpreting the paragenesis of metamorphic rocks.  Offered irregularly.
GEL 247
Metamorphic Petrology Seminar
GEL 145;  or Consent of Instructor.  GEL 246 recommended.
Selected topics in metamorphic petrology (e.g., mass transport processes, tectonic settings, geothermometry, thermal structure of metamorphic belts, regional studies). Offered irregularly.
GEL 250
Advanced Geochemistry Seminar
GEL 146;  or Consent of Instructor.
Critical review of selected topics in geochemistry including: ore genesis, hydrothermal and geothermal fluids, recent and ancient sediments, isotope geology, origin and chemistry of the oceans. Subject varies yearly depending on student interest.
GEL 251
Advanced Topics in Isotope Geochemistry & Cosmochemistry
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Astrophysical context on origin of Solar System, synthesis of chemical elements, condensation sequence, star and planet formation, cosmochronology, building blocks of planets, development on planets' layered structure, atmosphere and hydrosphere and the role of comets/asteroids for volatile delivery. Offered irregularly.
GEL 253
Current Topics in Igneous Petrology
GEL 143;  or Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing in Geology.
Topical seminar designed to help graduate students develop and maintain familiarity with current and past literature related to igneous rock petrogenesis.
GEL 254
Physical Chemistry of Igneous Processes
CHE 110A;  GEL 143;  and Consent of Instructor.  GEL 143 or consent of instructor; CHE 110B and CHE 110C recommended.
Introduction of modern concepts in chemical thermodynamics and kinetics, and fluid dynamics of magmatic systems for graduate students in petrology. Offered irregularly.
GEL 255
Experimental Petrology
GEL 143;  or Consent of Instructor.
Introduction to techniques and methods of design and executing experiments on Earth-forming minerals and rocks. Problems and examples from igneous and metamorphic petrology will be utilized. Offered irregularly.
GEL 260
Paleontology
Graduate standing in geology or a biological science.
Selected problems in paleontology. Subject to be studied will be decided at an organizational meeting. Offered irregularly.
GEL 261
Paleobiology Graduate Seminar 1: Evolutionary Aspects
Graduate standing in Geology or a biological science; qualified undergraduates will be accepted on an exception-only basis.
Treat one or more of several topics in paleobiology from a phylogenetic perspective, including major patterns in evolution, building the tree of life, extinction & phylogeny, phylogeny of major phyla, and the relation between taxonomy & phylogeny.
GEL 281N
Instrumental Techniques for Earth Scientists
MAT 021A;  MAT 021B;  MAT 021C;  ((PHY 007A,  PHY 007B,  PHY 007C) or (PHY 009A,  PHY 009B,  PHY 009C));  or Consent of Instructor.
Laboratory research techniques for new graduate students in Geology.  Demonstration of and exposure to appropriate techniques in research.
GEL 285
Field Studies in Marine Geochemistry
Consent of Instructor.
Marine geochemistry with the opportunity of going to sea or into the field on land. Techniques of seafloor mapping using bottom photography, marine geochemical sampling, and method of data reduction and sample analysis. Analysis of data/samples collected.
GEL 291
Geology of the Sierra Nevada
Consent of Instructor.
Short oral presentations by students and faculty concerning results of their past work and plans for future work in the Sierra. A written abstract is required following the format required at professional meetings. Offered irregularly.
GEL 292
River Forum
Graduate standing.
Review and discussion of latest research and fundamental issues surrounding riverine systems, with emphasis on physical processes. Topics vary. Offered irregularly.
GEL 293
Geologic Event of the Week
Graduate standing.
Seminar/discussion group to review and discuss recent earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, and other significant geologic events.  The focus is on understanding the available observations, the physical processes behind each event, the geological setting, and societal consequences. Offered irregularly.
GEL 294
Structure/Tectonics Forum
Graduate student in geology or consent of instructor.
Seminar/discussion group to review and discuss latest research in structural geology and tectonics, and on-going research of participants. Topics will vary each quarter depending on the interests of the group. Occasional field trips to areas of current interest. 
GEL 295
Geophysics Forum
GEL 100;  GEL 101;  or Consent of Instructor.
Seminar/discussion group to review and discuss latest research in geophysics, and on-going research of participants. Topics will change each quarter depending on the interests of the group. Offered irregularly.
GEL 295
Geophysics Forum
GEL 101;  or Consent of Instructor.
Seminar/discussion group to review and discuss latest research in geophysics, and on-going research of participants. Topics will change each quarter depending on the interests of the group. Offered irregularly.
GEL 296
Advanced Problems in Tectonics 
GEL 101;  and Consent of Instructor.
Seminar dealing with current problems in tectonics of selected regions. Topics will change from year to year. Emphasis on study of recent literature. Offered irregularly.
GEL 297
Geophysics Forum
Graduate student status in the Geology Department, or consent of instructor.
Seminar/discussion group to review and discuss latest research in geophysics, and on-going research of participants. Topics will change each quarter depending on the interests of the group. Offered irregularly.
GEL 390
Methods of Teaching Geology
Graduate student standing in Geology.
Introduction to graduate-level writing and undergraduate-level teaching skills in geology. Persuasive (proposal) writing workshop; discussions on campus teaching resources, presenting information, managing classroom dynamics, evaluating student performance. Participation in teaching program required for Ph.D. in Geology.
GEL 391
Ethical Issues in Earth Science
Graduate standing in Geology or consent of instructor.
Reading and discussion of ethical issues arising in the earth sciences. Topics include scientific misconduct, gender equity in science, authorship of scientific papers, establishing priorities in research, and related issues. Offered irregularly.
GEO 200AN
Geographical Concepts
Graduate standing in Geography or consent of instructor.
Concepts and thematic content of the discipline, including contemporary research questions. A brief review of the history of geographic thought and practice is done at the beginning of the course.
GEO 200BN
Theory & Practice of Geography
Graduate standing.Limited to 20 students.
Development, application, and philosophical background of theory in discipline of geography and geographical knowledge production. Similarities and differences in theories employed in physical and human geography and cartography. Geographic contributions to interdisciplinary theory bridging biophysical sciences, social sciences, and humanities.
GEO 200E
Advanced Research Design in Geography
GEO 200AN;  GEO 200BN;  GEO 200CN;  GEO 200DN;  Graduate standing.Limited to 15 students.
Helps Ph.D. students develop their research question, design their research plan and complete a full dissertation research proposal.   
GEO 201
Sources & General Literature of Geography
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing in geography.
Designed for students preparing for higher degrees in geography.
GEO 210
Topics in Biogeography
EVE 147 or WFC 156 (can be concurrent);  Or equivalent.Consent of instructor required for undergraduates.
Current topics in historical and ecological biogeography, including macroecology and areography, GIS and remote sensing, phylogeography, vegetation, plant and animal community and species geography.  Systematics, climate change, and conservation will be addressed.
GEO 211
Physical Geography Traditions & Methods
Introductory course in physical geography.Graduate-level standing in geography or related discipline.
Discussion of the physical science tradition in geography, including key concepts and current research in climatology, geomorphology, soils geography, biogeography, climate change, watershed science, and coastal studies. Research paradigms,  programs, and methods as used by physical geographers will be discussed.
GEO 212
Water Resource Management
GEO 114; GEO 141; GEO; 142; GEO 153 recommended.
Engineering, institutional, economic, and social basis for managing local and regional water resources. Examples in the context of California's water development and management. Uses of computer modeling to improve water management.
GEO 214
Seminar in Geographical Ecology 
EVE 100 or EVE 101;  or Consent of Instructor.
Recent developments in theoretical and experimental biogeography, historical biogeography and related themes in systematics, the biology of colonizing species, and related topics. 
GEO 220
Topics in Human Geography
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.Limited to 20 students.
Examination of philosophy and theory in human geography with an emphasis on contemporary debates and concepts in social, cultural, humanistic, political, and economic geographies. Specific discussion of space, place, scale and landscape; material and imagined geographies.
GEO 230
Citizenship, Democracy, & Public Space
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Introduction to seminal works in political theory, philosophy, and the social sciences that focus on citizenship and the public sphere; development of critical perspective regarding restructuring of public space in a pluralistic and global culture; discussion of contemporary case studies.
GEO 241
The Economics of Community Development
Graduate standing.
Economic theories and methods of planning for communities.  Human resources, community services and infrastructure, industrialization and technological change, and regional growth.  The community's role in the greater economy.
GEO 245
The Political Economy of Urban & Regional Development
CRD 157;  CRD 244;  Or the equivalent.
How global, political and economic restructuring and national and state policies are mediated by community politics; social production of urban form; role of the state in uneven development; dynamics of urban growth and decline; regional development in California.
GEO 246
The Political Economy of Transnational Migration
Graduate standing.
Theoretical perspectives and empirical research on social, cultural, political, and economic processes of transnational migration to the U.S. Discussion of conventional theories will precede contemporary comparative perspectives on class, race, ethnicity, citizenship, and the ethnic economy.
GEO 248
Social Policy, Welfare Theories & Communities 
Graduate standing.
Theories and comparative histories of modern welfare states and social policy in relation to legal/normative, organizational, and administrative aspects. Analysis of specific social issues within the U.S./California context.
GEO 254
Political Ecology of Community Development
Graduate standing.
Community development from the perspective of geographical political ecology.  Social and environmental outcomes of the dynamic relationship between communities and land-based resources, and between social groups. Cases of community conservation and development in developing and industrialized countries.
GEO 280
Field Studies in Geography
Consent of Instructor.  Undergraduate or graduate coursework in geography.Limited to 20 students.
A topic or sub-discipline of geography forms the theme for the course in any given offering, with a focus on current research on this topic, field methodologies, and data analysis in human and physical geography.
GEO 281
Transportation Survey Methods
(STA 013 or STA 013Y);  ECI 251 recommended.
Description of types of surveys commonly used in transportation demand modeling, including travel and activity diaries, attitudinal, panel, computer, and stated-response surveys. Discussion of sampling, experimental design, and survey design issues. Analysis methods, including factor, discriminant and cluster analysis.
GEO 286
Selected Topics in Environmental Remote Sensing
ERS 186;  and Consent of Instructor.  Or equivalent required; ERS 186L recommended.
In depth investigation of advanced topics in remote sensing applications, measurements, and theory.
GEO 290
Seminar in Geography
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Seminar focuses on specified topical areas within geography, which will vary quarter to quarter. Students expected to present an oral seminar on an aspect of the general topic under discussion.
GEO 293
Graduate Internship
Consent of Instructor.
Individually designed, supervised internship, off campus, in community or institutional setting.  Developed with advice of faculty mentor.
GEO 297
Graduate Group in Geography
Graduate standing.
Seminars by UC Davis faculty and prominent national and international scholars; research presentations by Graduate Group in Geography Ph.D. candidates. 
GEO 298
Group Study
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.

GEO 299D
Individual Study
and Consent of Instructor.  Graduate student status in Geography.

GER 002
Elementary German
GER 001.Not open for credit to students who have taken GER 001A.
Continuation of GER 001 in areas of grammar and basic language skills.
GER 003
Elementary German
GER 002.Not open to students who have taken GER 001A.
Completion of grammar sequence and continuing practice of all language skills through cultural texts.
GER 020
Intermediate German
GER 003;  can be concurrent with GER 006.
Review of grammatical principles by means of written exercises; expanding of vocabulary through readings of modern texts.   
GER 021
Intermediate German
GER 020.
Review of grammatical principles by means of written exercises; expanding of vocabulary through readings of modern texts; addresses social relations and cultural practices in Germany; discusses history of Germany.
GER 022
Intermediate German
GER 021.
Review of grammatical principles by means of written exercises; expanding of vocabulary through readings of modern texts.
GER 049
Freshman Colloquium
Open only to students who have completed 40 or fewer quarter units of transferable college level work.
Readings, discussion and written projects treating topics such as communist-capitalist tension in German literary culture; masculine "versus" feminine authorial consciousness; disintegration and reconstitution of language reflecting cultural transformation; exorcising post-Holocaust national guilt and individual frustration-Germany's new European "mission."
GER 092
Field Work in German
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.Restricted to lower division standing.
Total immersion program in Germany or a German speaking setting in the U.S. to further develop students' proficiency in the German language.
GER 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Primarily for lower division students.
GER 101A
Survey of German Literature, 800-1800
GER 022;  or Consent of Instructor.
German literature from the Middle Ages to Classicism (800-1800) with an overview of major movements and authors.
GER 101B
Survey of German Literature, 1800-Present
GER 022.
German literature from the Age of Romanticism (1800) to the present  with an overview of major movements and authors. 
GER 103
Writing Skills in German
GER 022;  or Consent of Instructor.
Practice in different kinds of writing, such as abstracts, correspondence, lecture summaries, analysis of or response to short literary texts.
GER 104
Translation
GER 022;  or Consent of Instructor.
Exercises in German-to-English, English-to-German translation using texts from the areas of culture and commerce.  
GER 105
The Modern German Language
GER 022;  or Consent of Instructor.
Introduction to the linguistic analysis of contemporary German, including its phonology, morphology, syntax and semantics, as well as sociolinguistic considerations.
GER 109A
Business German
GER 022;  or Consent of Instructor.
Specialized language course using business-oriented information and publications as the basis for discussions, roleplay, reports, compositions and translations.
GER 109B
Advanced Business German
GER 022;  or Consent of Instructor.
Specialized advanced language course providing in-depth study of major business topics with the help of authentic texts and videos.
GER 112
Topics in German Literature
upper division standing or consent of instructor.
Knowledge of German not required. Investigation of significant themes and issues within their European context.
GER 114
 From Marlene Dietrich to Run, Lola Run: German Women & Film
ANT 001 (can be concurrent).
Knowledge of German not required. Women in German film from the Weimar Republic to present, with special emphasis on conceptualizations of gender, historical and political context, aesthetic and filmic innovations.
GER 116
Readings in Jewish Writing & Thought in German Culture
RST 023;  or Consent of Instructor.
Historical tradition of Jewish thought in the German cultural context; unique contributions of Jewish writers to culture of the German-speaking world; what it means to be "other" in the mainstream culture.
GER 118C
Germany Under the Third Reich
Background in Modern European History; GER 118B recommended.
No knowledge of German required.  Interdisciplinary study of German society and culture during the Third Reich (1933-45);  readings in aesthetics, history, and philosophy; study of Fascist culture in literature, film, architecture, and the graphic arts; focus on everyday life in Hitler's Germany. 
GER 118E
Contemporary German Culture
GER 022;  or Consent of Instructor.
Political, economic, social and cultural scene of Germany today. 
GER 120
Survey of German Culture
GER 022;  or Consent of Instructor.
Major developments in German arts, philosophical thought, social institutions, and political history.
GER 121
The Medieval Period in German Literature
GER 022;  or Consent of Instructor.
Literary-philosophical profile of the Mittelhochdeutsche Bltezeit in terms of the significant epics, romances, and lyric poetry. Readings in German.
GER 122
Reformation & Baroque
GER 022;  or Consent of Instructor.
Exemplary literary works of the 16th and 17th centuries tracing the principal lines of development and showing the reflection in literature of the social, as well as religious, scenes.
GER 123
Literature of the Classical Age
GER 022;  or Consent of Instructor.
Critical assessment of principal works of Goethe and Schiller within the historical and philosophical context of their times.
GER 124
Major Movements in German Literature
GER 022;  or Consent of Instructor.
Significant movements and schools in German literary history (e.g., the medieval troubadours, Storm and Stress, the romanticists, the George Circle, the expressionists), with emphasis on the broader cultural dynamics and ideologies as these apply to individual literary works.
GER 125
Short Fiction: 1880-1914
GER 022;  or Consent of Instructor.
Reading of short German fiction from the fin-de-sicle period and representative of various prose styles and cultural currents.
GER 126
Modern German Literature
GER 022;  or Consent of Instructor.
Selections from significant works of major contemporary writers, such as Hesse, Mann, Kafka, Rilke, Brecht, Grass.  
GER 127
 Major Writers in German
GER 022;  or Consent of Instructor.
Examination of representative works by a major writer, set in the broader cultural context of the relevant period or movement.
GER 129
Postwar Women Writers
GER 022;  or Consent of Instructor.
Major writers in both Germanies, Austria, and Switzerland since 1945.  Topics include the concept of a feminist aesthetics, East vs. West German writers, and the status of minority women writers in Germany (Jewish, Turkish-German, Afro-German).
GER 131
German Lyric Poetry
GER 022;  or Consent of Instructor.
Study of the genre of lyric poety from the late Middle Ages through Renaissance, Baroque, Classical, Romantic, and Modern periods in correlation with other literary forms and the social climate of each period.
GER 132
The German Novelle
GER 022;  or Consent of Instructor.
Inquiry into the art of the "Novelle" through analysis of the materials and formal devices of representative authors from Goethe to Kafka.
GER 133
The German Drama
GER 022;  or Consent of Instructor.
Readings in the works of Germany's leading dramatists from the 18th century to the present day, such as Lessing, Goethe, Schiller, Kleist, Bchner, Hauptmann, Brecht.
GER 134
Topics in German Intellectual History
GER 022;  or Consent of Instructor.
Topics in German intellectual history with materials from a number of periods, genres, and disciplines.   
GER 143
Language Through Media
GER 022;  or Consent of Instructor.
Study of contemporary German-language news media (press, video, film, CD-ROM, Internet) for insight into political and cultural developments in the German-speaking countries.  
GER 160
Love in the Middle Ages
GER 022;  or Consent of Instructor.
Analysis of the phenomenon of love in selected medieval lyrical poems and romances of the 12th- and 13th-century Bltezeit. Origins of courtly love, love & individualism, love & the Church, love & adultery.
GER 168
Multiculturalism in German Literature
GER 022;  or Consent of Instructor.
Examples of German literature from the High Middle Ages to the present that explore the "encounter with the other" (people of color, different beliefs and cultures, and inner-German minorities).
GER 176A
Classic Weimar Cinema
HUM 001.
"German Weimar (1919-1933) cinema.  Fritz Lang, F.W. Murnau, and G.W. Pabst among others.  Influence on world-wide (esp. Hollywood) film genres such as film noir, horror, science fiction, and melodrama." 
GER 185
The Age of Bismarck
GER 022;  or Consent of Instructor.
Notable literary repercussions of the zenith of Germany's international status at the time of Bismarck's Chancellorship. The poetry of Storm, the prose of Fontane, the drama of Hauptmann.
GER 192
Field Work in German
GER 109A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Total immersion program in Germany or a German speaking setting in the U.S. to further develop student proficiency in the German language.
GER 194HA
Honors Program
Open only to majors with a 3.500 minimum GPA in at least 135 graduation units.
Research of an integrative nature (in either "General" or "Area Studies Emphasis" fields of major), guided by thesis advisor chosen by student.
GER 194HB
Honors Program
Open only to majors with a 3.500 minimum GPA in at least 135 graduation units.
Writing of Honors Thesis on topic selected by student in consultation with thesis advisor.
GER 197T
Tutoring in German
Consent of German Program Director.
Tutoring in undergraduate courses including leadership in small voluntary discussion groups affiliated with department courses.
GER 206
Cognitive Grammar for Applied Linguists
Graduate standing.
Analysis of grammar and application of cognitive grammar to language instruction. Syntactical problems and analyses relevant to the language which the student will teach.
GER 255
Aesthetics in the Age of Goethe
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Emergence of aesthetic autonomy from 18th-century normative poetics during the Age of Goethe. The shift from a model based on the imitation of nature (and the Ancients) to a new concept grounded in the individuality of aesthetic experience.
GER 285
Middle High German Literature
Consent of Instructor.Graduate standing.
Extensive reading of Middle High German texts in the original language. Examines linguistic and literary problems.
GER 390A
The Teaching of German
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Theoretical instruction in modern teaching methods and demonstration of their practical application. Required of new teaching assistants.
GER 390B
The Teaching of German
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Theoretical instruction in modern teaching methods and demonstration of their practical application. Required of new teaching assistants.
GER 390C
The Teaching of German
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Theoretical instruction in modern teaching methods and demonstration of their practical application. Required of new teaching assistants.
GER 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Graduate standing.

GER 400
Tutorial & Instructional Internship
Graduate standing.
Apprentice training in ongoing undergraduate literature courses taught by regular staff, with supplementary weekly critique sessions; intern leadership of discussion sections under staff supervision.
GGG 201A
Advanced Genetic Analysis
BIS 101;  STA 100;  Or the equivalent, graduate standing.
Fundamentals of genetic analysis and chromosome structure using model organisms including mutation, transmission, complementation, suppression, and enhancement as well as epigenetic phenomena at the whole organism and molecular levels.
GGG 201B
Genomics
GGG 201A;  GGG 201C;  Or equivalents that provide a basic understanding of genetics and molecular biology.Class limited to 40 students; priority to Genetics Graduate Group students.
Prokaryotic and eukaryotic genomes. Experimental strategies and analytical challenges of modern genomics research and the theory and mechanics of data analysis. Structural, functional, and comparative genomics. Related issues in bioinformatics.
GGG 201C
Molecular Genetic Mechanisms in Disease
BIS 101;  Or the equivalent.Pass One restricted to graduate students in genetics, microbiology or biochemistry and molecular biology graduate groups. 
Exploration of how basic mechanisms of molecular biology contribute to health and disease. Diseases related to animals, plants, and microbes will highlight fundamental concepts in the assembly, function and regulation of DNA, RNA, and protein.
GGG 201D
Quantitative & Population Genetics
GGG 201A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Basic concepts of quantitative and population genetics including gene and genotypic frequencies, multiple factor hypothesis, phenotypic and genotypic values, heritability, selection, genetic variation, the detection of quantitative trait loci and evolution in populations. Experimental and analytical methods.
GGG 205
Molecular Genetics Laboratory
BIS 101 (can be concurrent);  Or the equivalent, enrolled in Genetics Graduate Group.
Students will conduct experiments in molecular genetics laboratories. Individual research problems will emphasize experimental design, experience with methodologies, and data interpretation.
GGG 210
Horizontal Gene Transfer
Background in basic microbiology and genetics required; introductory course in molecular biology, biotechnology and microbial and animal/plant genetics recommended.
Transfer of genes between unrelated organisms in nature. Dissemination of foreign DNA from genetically engineered organisms, including plants and animals. Mechanisms by which genes are transferred horizontally, and between kingdoms.
GGG 211
Concepts in Human Genetics & Genomics
GGG 201A;  Or equivalent; GGG 201B and GGG 201C or equivalent are recommended.Pass One restricted to graduate students enrolled in the Human Genetics Focus Group; Pass Two restricted to graduate students enrolled in Genetics Graduate Group; after that, open enrollment for graduate students up to 12 students, then undergraduates.
Human genomic organization; genetic structure of populations; positional cloning, application of linkage, association, and haplotypes; quantitative trait loci analyses; integrative genetic studies of gene expression; DNA repair mechanisms in genetic disease; mutation analyses; epigenetics; mitochondrial disease; gene manipulation and therapy.
GGG 220
Genomics & Biotechnology of Plant Improvement
BIS 101;  Or equivalent.
Integration of modern biotechnology and classical plant breeding including the impact of structural, comparative and functional genomics on gene discovery, characterization and exploitation. Covers molecular markers, plant transformation, hybrid production, disease resistance, and novel output traits.
GGG 250
Functional Genomics: From Bench to Bedside
GGG 201C;  MCB 214;  Or equivalent.
Functional genomics (how genetic variation and epigenomics affect gene expression), with an emphasis on clinical relevance and applications. Topics include genetic variation and human disease, cancer therapeutics, and biomarker discovery.
GGG 291
Seminar in History of Genetics
BIS 101.
The development of modern genetic theories beginning with Mendel.
GGG 293
Seminar in Animal Genetics
GGG 201A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Emphasis on recent advances in the field of animal genetics, ranging from quantitative genetics to molecular biology as it relates to animals.
GGG 294
Seminar in Human Genetics
GGG 201A;  and Consent of Instructor.
Topics of current interest in human genetics and genomics.
GGG 295
Seminar in Molecular Genetics
GGG 201A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Topics of current interest related to the structure, modification and expression of genes.
GGG 296
Scientific Professionalism & Integrity
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Review of basic skills required of contemporary scientists. Topics include scientific conduct, manuscript preparation, grant writing, seminar presentations, and time management. Emphasis on responsibilities of scientists to factually and thoughtfully communicate results.
GGG 297
Seminar in Plant Genetics
GGG 201A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Current topics in plant genetics will be examined in student-conducted seminars and discussion format. The integration of molecular, organismal and population genetics to address questions in plant biology will be emphasized.
GGG 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Group study of selected topics in genetics.
GGG 300
Methods in Teaching Genetics
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Practical experience in the methods and problems of teaching genetics. Includes analysis of texts and supporting material, discussion of teaching techniques, preparing for and conducting discussion or laboratory sections, formulating examinations under supervision of instructor.
GMD 192
Internship in General Medicine
Upper division standing; approval of project by preceptor prior to internship.
Supervised work experience in general medicine.
GMD 460
General Medicine Consults
Fourth-year medical students with consent of instructor; a general medicine clerkship.Limited enrollment.
Supervised opportunity to see entire spectrum of medical problems encountered by a general internist. Student spends time in General Medicine Clinic and on the General Medicine Consult Service. Consultation Service is particularly concerned with medical evaluation of surgical patients.
GMD 470
Health Care Ethics
Consent of Instructor.
Guided independent study of issues in biomedical ethics, with discussionof readings that are based on student interests and needs. Participation in ethics rounds.
GMD 485
Introduction to Health Care Ethics
Medical student in good standing.
Introduction to concepts and methods of healthcare ethics. Emphasis on problems and methods.
GMD 499
General Medicine Research
Consent of Instructor.
Student will be involved in a clinical research problem within the
GRK 002
Elementary Greek
GRK 001;  Or the equivalent.
Continuation of GRK 001.
GRK 002NT
Elementary New Testament Greek
GRK 002 (can be concurrent);  Concurrent attendance required.
Supplementary study of New Testament Greek.
GRK 003
Intermediate Greek
GRK 002;  Or the equivalent.
Continuation of GRK 002. Selected readings from Greek authors.
GRK 003NT
Elementary New Testament Greek
GRK 003 (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.  Concurrent attendance required.
Supplementary study of New Testament Greek.
GRK 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

GRK 100
Readings in Greek Prose
GRK 003;  Or equivalent.
Review of Greek morphology, syntax, and vocabulary. Readings in Greek prose authors, including Xenophon.
GRK 101
Plato
GRK 100;  or Consent of Instructor.

GRK 102
Euripides
GRK 100;  or Consent of Instructor.

GRK 103A
Homer: Iliad
GRK 003.

GRK 103B
Homer: Odyssey
GRK 100;  or Consent of Instructor.

GRK 104
Menander
GRK 100;  or Consent of Instructor.

GRK 105
Attic Orators
GRK 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Selected readings from the orators of 4th- and 5th- century Athens.
GRK 106
Greek Hexameter Poetry
GRK 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Selected readings from ancient Greek hexameter poetry. Wisdom poetry, hymns, epyllia, idylls, epic, natural history and other texts from the hexameter tradition.
GRK 110
Readings in the Greek Novel
GRK 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Selected readings from Greek prose fiction of the late classical, Hellenistic and imperial periods.
GRK 111
Sophocles
GRK 100;  or Consent of Instructor.

GRK 112
Aristophanes
GRK 100;  or Consent of Instructor.

GRK 113
Thucydides
GRK 100;  or Consent of Instructor.

GRK 114
Lyric Poetry
GRK 100;  or Consent of Instructor.

GRK 115
Aeschylus
GRK 100;  or Consent of Instructor.

GRK 116
Herodotus
GRK 100;  or Consent of Instructor.

GRK 121
Greek Prose Composition
GRK 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Intensive grammar and vocabulary review through exercises in Greek prose composition. 
GRK 130
Readings in Later Greek
GRK 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Translation and discussion of selected readings from Hellenistic to Byzantine Greek literature. 
GRK 131
Readings in Ancient Greek Philosophy & Science
GRK 100 (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.
Selected readings from ancient Greek philosophical and scientific writers. Texts on logical truth and empirical sense data, material and social contexts of ancient Greek philosophy and science.
GRK 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

GRK 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

HDE 092
Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Field work experience or at least one course (e.g. HDE 100A, HDE 100B, HDE 140 or HDE 140L) related to fieldwork assignment.
Supervised internship, off campus and on campus, in community and institutional setting. Involves progressively greater (supervised) participation in program delivery or assessment.
HDE 098
Directed Group Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

HDE 100A
Infancy & Early Childhood
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  (BIS 002A or BIS 010 or BIS 001A or BIS 010V) or MCB 010 or NPB 010 or NPB 012 or MIC 010.Pass One restricted to Human Development majors. 
Biological, social, and cultural influences in the psychological growth and development of children, prenatal through age six. Two observations of preschool children required.
HDE 100B
Middle Childhood & Adolescence
(HDE 100A or PSC 140);  (PSC 001 or PSC 001Y).
Interplay of biological and social-cultural factors in the emotional, cognitive and social development from middle childhood through adolescence.
HDE 100C
Adulthood & Aging
PSC 001 or PSC 001Y.
Development during early, middle, and late adulthood; biological, cognitive, and psycho-social aspects of adult development. Emphasis on normative patterns of development which characterize "successful aging."
HDE 101
Cognitive Development
HDE 100A or HDE 100B or PSC 140.Pass One restricted to Human Development and Psychology majors.
Theories, methods, evidence, and debates in the field of cognitive development, such as nature/nurture, constraints on learning, and the role of plasticity. Topics include attention, memory, concepts about the physical and social world, and language.
HDE 102
Social & Personality Development
HDE 100A or HDE 100B or PSC 140.Pass One open to Human Development or Psychology majors.
Social and personality development of children, infancy through adolescence. Topics include the development of personality, achievement motivation, self-understanding, sex-role identity, and antisocial behavior. Emphasis on the interface between biological and social factors.
HDE 103
Cross-Cultural Study of Children
HDE 100A or PSC 140;  Consent of Instructor.
Cross-cultural studies of children in developing countries and among minority groups in the U.S.
HDE 110
Contemporary American Family
PSC 001 or PSC 001Y or SOC 001 or SOC 002.
Factors currently influencing American families including changing economic conditions, changing sex roles, divorce, and parenthood; theories and research on family interaction.
HDE 117
Longevity
Upper division standing or consent of instructor.
Nature, origin, determinants, and limits of longevity with particular reference to humans; emphasis on implications of findings from non-human model systems including natural history, ecology and evolution of life span; description of basic demographic techniques including life table methods.
HDE 120
Research Methods in Human Development
STA 013 or STA 013V or STA 013Y or EDU 114 or PSC 041 or (SOC 046A,  SOC 046B).
Scientific process, research designs, and experimental controls; APA manuscript style and scientific writing; statistical analysis and interpretation of results. Laboratory exercises to collect data, analyze and interpret results, and write scientific papers. 
HDE 121
Psychological Assessment
(HDE 100A or HDE 100B);  (STA 013 or STA 013Y or PSC 041 or (SOC 046A,  SOC 046B)).
Current issues and methodology related to the process of psychological assessment with children.
HDE 130
Developmental Psychopathology
(HDE 100A,  HDE 100B) or PSC 140;  Consent of Instructor.
Foundational principles and current issues in developmental psychopathology, the study of mental health problems and disorders that originate in childhood and adolescence (e.g., disruptive behavior, mood and anxiety disorders).
HDE 132
Individual Differences in Cognition
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  (HDE 100A or HDE 100B).
Individual differences in cognition, including learning disabilities and giftedness. Education implications and neurodevelopmental substrates of individual differences in cognition.
HDE 140
Communication & Interaction with Young Children
HDE 100A;  HDE 140L (can be concurrent);  and Consent of Instructor.  HDE 140L required concurrently.Enrollment requires sign up for laboratory time at the Child & Family Studies Center located at 244 First Street, Davis, CA.
Integration of research, theory and practice in child development, emphasizing the role of relationships in creating a growth-promoting environment for young children. Includes: peer relationships, emotional understanding and self regulation, attachment, communication and school readiness. 
HDE 140L
Laboratory in Early Childhood
HDE 140 (can be concurrent);  and Consent of Instructor.  HDE 140 must be taken concurrently for first 3 units of credit; students must contact the Center for Child & Family Studies to enroll.Limited enrollment.
Application of theories of learning and development to interaction with infants, toddlers, and preschoolers at Early Childhood Laboratory. Applied skills in communication, guidance and curriculum.
HDE 141
Field Study With Children & Adolescents
HDE 100A or HDE 100B;  and Consent of Instructor.
Study of children's affective, cognitive and social development within the context of family/school environments, hospitals and foster group homes. 
HDE 142
Field Study with Emotionally Distressed Children & Adolescents
HDE 130 (can be concurrent);  and Consent of Instructor.
Field study with children who are identified as emotionally distressed, including those with internalizing and externalizing behavioral problems. 
HDE 143
Field Studies of the Elderly
HDE 100C or HDE 160 (can be concurrent);  and Consent of Instructor.
Apply theory and research on adult development and aging, work with older adults in a variety of settings, and develop skills relevant to that application. Develop a small research project.
HDE 160
Social Aspects of Aging
HDE 100C.
How the social context affects adult development and aging. Emphasis on demography, social policy, culture, and adaptation. Oral histories as class projects.
HDE 161
Applied Cognition & Aging
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  HDE 100C.
Principles from cognition and aging and applies these to real-world concerns in areas including education, technology, job performance, and health. Considers physical and social changes in later life that impact functioning.                    
HDE 161
Technology Use, Health, & Aging
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  HDE 100C;  or Consent of Instructor.
Principles from gerontology applied to older adults' use of technology to support health and well-being across a variety of domains (e.g., cognitive and physical fitness, social engagement) and contexts (assisted living, aging in place). Cognitive, sensory, and physical changes in later life that impact technology use.
HDE 163
Cognitive Neuropsychology in Adulthood & Aging
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  HDE 100C recommended.
Theories, methods, and findings concerning the relationship between cognitive processes and brain functioning. Readings, lectures, and in-class discussions cover research on normal younger and older adults, neuropsychological case studies, and selected patient groups (e.g., amnesia, schizophrenia, Alzheimer's disease).
HDE 190C
Introductory Research Conference
Involvement in ongoing research; consent of instructor.
Instructors lead discussions with undergraduate students who involve themselves in a research project. Research papers are reviewed and aspects of project proposals developed out of class are presented and evaluated.
HDE 192
Internship 
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Supervised internship off and on campus, in community, and institutionalsettings.
HDE 200A
Early Development
Graduate standing; basic biology or physiology; one upper division course in psychology or a related field; one upper division or graduate course in developmental psychology (can be concurrent).
Theory and research on the biological, social, cognitive, and cultural aspects of development from conception to the age of five years.
HDE 200B
Middle Childhood & Adolescence
Graduate standing; basic biology or physiology, and at least two upper division or graduate level courses in psychology or related fields.
Theory and research on biological, cognitive, social, and cultural influences on behavioral development from age five years until late adolescence.
HDE 203
Adolescent Behavioral & Emotional Development
HDE 200B.
Analysis of recent theories, research methods, and major findings on adolescent behavioral and emotional development, including contextual and genetic influences on adolescence, pubertal transitions, and social/family contexts and processes. Emphasis on multi-level mechanisms underlying adolescent behavioral and emotional development.
HDE 204
Developmental Neuroscience & Adolescent Psychopathology 
Graduate standing in Human Development, Psychology, Education, Neuroscience or consent of instructor.
Introduction to human developmental neuroscience. Understanding of adolescence and its characterization as a time of risky and unhealthy behavior and vulnerability to onset of mental disorder as well as issues around plasticity of the adolescent brain and prevention/intervention.
HDE 205
Longitudinal Data Analysis
PSC 204B;  Or equivalent graduate courses in statistics or consent of instructor; familiarity with multiple regression and the basics of matrix algebra.Open to graduate students only.
Introduction to longitudinal data manipulation, organization, description, and modeling in the multilevel modeling and structural equation modeling frameworks.
HDE 207
Topics in Applied Cognitive Aging
Graduate standing in Human Development Graduate Group, Psychology, Education, or a related social science, or consent of instructor.
Apply principles from cognitive aging to real-world concerns in areas such as education, technology, job performance, and health. Examine how physical and social changes occurring in later life impact functioning.
HDE 207
Topics in Technology Use, Health & Aging
Graduate standing in one of the following Graduate Groups: Human Development, Psychology, Communication, Education, and Nursing Science and Healthcare Leadership, or consent of instructor.
Principles from gerontology applied to older adults' use of technology to support health and well-being across a variety of domains (e.g., cognitive and physical fitness, social engagement) and contexts (assisted living, aging in place). Cognitive, sensory, and physical changes in later life that impact technology use.
HDE 210
Theories of Behavioral Development
Graduate standing in behavioral sciences.
Consideration of enduring issues in theories of behavioral development; analysis of adequacy of major theoretical schools (e.g., social learning, Piagetian) as scientific theories.
HDE 211
Physiological Correlates of Behavioral Development
Consent of Instructor.
An overview of mechanisms of organismic development and the implications of developmental biology for the analysis of behavioral ontogeny; consideration of parallels between processes of organismic development and behavioral development in children and infra-human mammals.
HDE 220
Research Methods in Human Growth & Development
STA 013 or STA 013Y;  Or the equivalent and at least two upper division courses in Human Biology or Developmental Psychology.
Overview of qualitative and quantitative approaches to empirical inquiry in the social sciences, with a focus on theory and research methods in biological growth and cognitive and social/emotional development from prenatal period to death.
HDE 232
Cognition & Aging
HDE 200C.
Manner in which cognitive processes are affected by aging as well as an understanding of the changes in the central nervous system occurring with aging.
HDE 234
Children's Learning & Thinking
HDE 200A or PSC 212 recommended.
Analysis of theories, research methods, and major findings of children's higher-order cognition, including origins of knowledge, development of problem-solving skills, reasoning strategies, and scientific concepts, with an emphasis on the underlying mechanism involved in children's thinking and learning processes.
HDE 238
The Context of Individual Development 
Graduate standing in Human Development, Child Development, Education, Psychology, Anthropology, Sociology, or consent of instructor.
Analysis of human development within the context of daily life. Contextualizing theories and methods of developmental psychology will be distinguished from contextual theories and methods. Developmental psychology models will be distinguished from child psychology models.
HDE 239
Developmental Psychopathology
Graduate standing in Human Development, Psychology, Sociology, a related social science, or consent of instructor.
Theories, current issues, and empirical studies of atypical development from infancy to adulthood that integrate multiple system levels from genes, neurobiology, cognition, emotion, family and peer dynamics to community and cultural contexts.
HDE 290C
Research Conference
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Supervising instructors lead research discussions with their graduate students. Research papers are reviewed and project proposals are presented and evaluated. 
HDE 291
Research Issues in Human Development
Graduate Standing in the behavioral sciences.
In-depth presentations of research issues in particular areas of behavioral development.
HDE 292
Graduate Internship
Consent of faculty (internship sponsor) and satisfactory completion of placement relevant course work, for example: EDU 213, EDU 216; HDE 222, HDE 242; LAW 272, LAW 273.
Individually designed supervised internship, off campus, in community or institutional setting. Developed with advice of faculty mentor.
HDE 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Graduate standing.

HEB 002
Elementary Hebrew
HEB 001;  Or the equivalent.
Speaking, listening, comprehension, reading and writing fundamentals of modern Hebrew.
HEB 003
Elementary Hebrew
HEB 002;  Or the equivalent.
Speaking, listening comprehension, reading and writing fundamentals of modern Hebrew.
HEB 011
Introduction to Biblical Hebrew
HEB 010.
Continuation of HEB 010. Biblical text reading, simple/literal translation, verb and noun patterns, compounding of prepositions and nouns.
HEB 012
Introduction to Biblical Hebrew
HEB 011.
Continuation of HEB 011. Biblical text reading, simple/literal translation, verb and noun patterns, compounding of prepositions and nouns.
HEB 021
Intermediate Modern Hebrew I
HEB 003;  Consent of Instructor.
Development and refinement of grammar, composition, and language skills required for reading literary texts and conversing about contemporary topics at an advanced level. History of the Hebrew language.
HEB 022
Intermediate Modern Hebrew II
HEB 021;  Consent of Instructor.
Continued development and refinement of grammar, composition, and language skills required for reading literary texts and conversing about contemporary topics at an advanced level. History of the Hebrew language.
HEB 023
Intermediate Modern Hebrew III
HEB 022;  Consent of Instructor.
Continued development of grammar, composition, language skills required for reading literary texts and conversing about contemporary topics at an advanced level. History of the Hebrew language. Further development of writing and translating skills.
HEB 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study. 
HEB 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.
Special study. 
HEB 100AN
Advanced Modern Hebrew I
HEB 023;  or Consent of Instructor.  students who took HEB 100A as second-year Hebrew may take HEB 100AN.
Third year Hebrew. Advanced grammar and composition. Focus on reading of literary texts, oral skills and accuracy in writing.
HEB 100BN
Advanced Modern Hebrew II
HEB 100AN;  or Consent of Instructor.  students who took HEB 100B as second-year Hebrew may take HEB 100BN.
Third year Hebrew. Advanced grammar and composition. Focus on reading of literary texts, oral skills and accuracy in writing.
HEB 100CN
Advanced Modern Hebrew III
HEB 100BN.
Third-year Hebrew. Advanced grammar and composition. Focus on reading of literary texts, oral skills and accuracy in writing. Students who have taken HEB 100C as second-year Hebrew may take HEB 100CN.
HIN 002
Elementary Hindi/Urdu II
HIN 001.
Continuation of HIN 001.  Devanagari Script through development of all language skills in a cultural context with emphasis on communicative proficiency.
HIN 003
Elementary Hindi/Urdu III
HIN 002.
Introduction to listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills in Hindi using the Devanagari script and brief introduction to basic literacy in Urdu using the Nasataliq script. 
HIN 021
Intermediate Hindi/Urdu I
HIN 003.
Intermediate level course for students who have completed Elementary Hindi/Urdu or the equivalent. Students will continue to practice their skills in listening, speaking, reading and writing in Hindi and Urdu.
HIN 022
Intermediate Hindi/Urdu II
HIN 021.
Intermediate level course where students will continue to practice their skills in listening, speaking, reading and writing in Hindi and Urdu.
HIN 023
Intermediate Hindi/Urdu III
HIN 022.
Intermediate level course where students will continue to practice their skills in listening, speaking, reading and writing in Hindi and Urdu.
HIN 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study. 
HIN 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.
Special study. 
HIN 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to graduate students. 
Teaching practicum. 
HIS 092
Internship in History
Consent of Instructor.
Supervised internship and study as a historian, archivist, curator, or an in another history-related capacity, in an approved organization or institution.
HIS 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Primarily for lower division students. May be taught abroad.
HIS 103
Topics in Historical Research
Consent of Instructor.
Individual research resulting in a research paper on a specific topic in one of various fields of history. May be repeated for credit.
HIS 104A
Introduction to Historical Research & Interpretation
Acceptance into History Department Honors Program.
Directed reading and research aimed at preparing students to select appropriate topics and methodologies for a senior honors essay and to situate their topics within a meaningful, broad context of historical interpretations.
HIS 104B
Honors Thesis
HIS 104A.
Research in preparation of a senior honors thesis under the direction of a faculty advisor.
HIS 104C
Honors Thesis
HIS 104A;  HIS 104B.
Completion of a senior honors thesis under the direction of a faculty advisor.
HIS 110
Themes in World History
Upper division standing recommended.
Topics will emphasize the interaction of diverse regions of the world as well as common patterns of historical change.
HIS 115A
History of West Africa 
HIS 015 recommended.
West and Central Africa from 1500 to the present. Origins and impact of precolonial states and societies, the trans-Atlantic slave trade, colonialism, decolonization, nationalism, and changes in religions, politics, economics, gender, and culture.
HIS 115B
History of East Africa & the Indian Ocean
HIS 015 recommended.
Eastern Africa and the Indian Ocean world from 1500 to the present. Origins and impact of precolonial states and societies, slavery, trade, colonialism, decolonization, nationalism, and changes in religions, politics, economics, gender, and culture.
HIS 115C
History of Southern Africa from Exploration to the Rainbow Nation
HIS 015 recommended.
Southern Africa from 1500 to the present. Origins and impact of precolonial states and societies, European colonization, industrialization, urbanization, nationalism, apartheid, and changes in religions, politics, economics, gender, and culture.
HIS 115D
Postcolonial Africa
HIS 015 recommended.
Survey of social, political, cultural and economic change in African societies since the ending of European colonial rule in the 20th century. Themes include development, health and medicine, war and conflict, urbanization, global and inter-continental migration, and family and gender.
HIS 116
African History: Special Themes
HIS 015 recommended.
Themes of African history, such as African states and empires, slave trade, relationship of Egypt to rest of Africa, Bantu origins and migrations, and French policy of Assimilation and Association.
HIS 171BF
The Civil War in American Film
HIS 171B (can be concurrent);  HIS 171B required concurrently.
Viewing and discussion of films with short writing assignments.
HIS 174AD
Emergence of Modern America: Discussion
HIS 174A (can be concurrent);  HIS 174A required concurrently.
Intensive discussion of topics and readings for HIS 174A.
HIS 174BD
America in War, Prosperity & Depression: Discussion
HIS 174B (can be concurrent);  HIS 174B required concurrently.
Intensive discussion of topics and readings for HIS 174B.
HIS 174CD
The United States Since World War II: Discussion
HIS 174C (can be concurrent);  HIS 174C required concurrently.
Intensive discussion of topics and readings for HIS 174C.
HIS 174DD
Selected Themes in 20th-Century American History: Discussion
HIS 174D (can be concurrent);  HIS 174D required concurrently.
Intensive discussion of topics and readings for HIS 174D. 
HIS 191C
Late Imperial China
HIS 009A or upper division standing recommended.
Patterns and problems of Chinese life traced through the Ming and Ching dynasties (c.15001800), prior to the confrontation with the West in the Opium War. Readings include primary sources and novels portraying elite ethos as well as popular culture.
HIS 191D
19th-Century China: The Empire Confronts the West
HIS 009A or upper division standing recommended.
Decline and fall of the Chinese Empire, with particular attention to the social and political crises of the 19th century, and the response of government officials, intellectuals, and ordinary people to the increasing pressures of Western imperialism.
HIS 191E
The Chinese Revolution
Upper division standing recommended.
Analysis of China's cultural and political transformation from Confucian empire into Communist state. Emphasis on emergence and triumph of peasant revolutionary strategy (to 1949), with some attention to its implications for post-revolutionary culture and politics.
HIS 191F
History of the People's Republic of China
Upper division standing recommended.
Comprehensive analysis of recent Chinese history, including land reform, the Cultural Revolution, the post-Mao era, and the consequences of the new economic policies of the 1980s.
HIS 191G
Special Topics in Chinese History to 1800
HIS 009A recommended.
Topics in the history of China from the beginning of the imperial period through the high Qing dynasty.  Topics may be framed chronologically (e.g.,the Ming Dynasty) or thematically (e.g., Trade in early Chinese history). 
HIS 191H
Special Topics in Chinese History after 1800
HIS 009A recommended.
Topics in the history of China since 1800.  Topics may be framed chronologically (e.g., The Republican Period (1911-1948)) or thematically (e.g., The Modern Evolution of Chinese Law).
HIS 192
Internship in History
Consent of Instructor.  Enrollment dependant on availability of intern positions, with priority to History majors.
Supervised internship and study as historian, archivist, curator, or in another history-related capacity, in an approved organization or institution.
HIS 193A
History of the Modern Middle East, 1750-1914
HIS 006 recommended.
State and society within the Middle East from 1750 to 1914 under pressure of the changing world economy and European imperialism. Themes: colonialism, Orientalism, intellectual renaissance, Islamic reform, state-formation, role of subaltern groups.
HIS 193D
History of Modern Iran, From 1850 to Present
HIS 006 recommended.
Modern Iran from the mid 19th century to the present. Themes include the legacy of imperialism, cultural renaissance, the World Wars, nationalism, modernization, Islamic revival, gender, revolutionary movements, politics of oil and war.
HIS 195B
History of Modern Korea
Upper division standing recommended.
History of Modern Korea, from Yi dynasty period to 1990s. Covers the political and socioeconomic changes in 19th century, modernization under Japanese colonialism, postwar economic growth and effects of the Cold War.
HIS 197T
Tutoring in History
Enrolled as a History major with senior standing and consent of department chairperson.
Tutoring of students in lower division courses. Weekly meeting with instructors in charge of courses. Written reports on methods and materials required. No final examination.
HIS 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.
HIS 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

HIS 201A
Sources & General Literature of History: Ancient
Consent of Instructor.
Designed primarily for students preparing for higher degrees in history. Ancient. 
HIS 201B
Sources & General Literature of History: Medieval
Consent of Instructor.
Designed primarily for students preparing for higher degrees in history. Medieval.
HIS 201C
Sources & General Literature of History: Renaissance & Reformation
Consent of Instructor.
Designed primarily for students preparing for higher degrees in history. Renaissance & Reformation.
HIS 201D
Sources & General Literature of History: Early Modern Europe
Consent of Instructor.
Designed primarily for students preparing for higher degrees in history. Early Modern Europe.
HIS 201E
Sources & General Literature of History: Europe Since 1815
Consent of Instructor.
Designed primarily for students preparing for higher degrees in history.(E)Europe since 1815.
HIS 201F
Sources & General Literature of History: China to 1880
Consent of Instructor.
Designed primarily for students preparing for higher degrees in history. China to 1880.
HIS 201G
Sources & General Literature of History: China Since 1880
Consent of Instructor.
Designed primarily for students preparing for higher degrees in history. China since 1880.
HIS 201H
Sources & General Literature of History: Britain
Consent of Instructor.
Designed primarily for students preparing for higher degrees in history. Britain.
HIS 201I
Sources & General Literature of History: Latin America Since 1810
Consent of Instructor.
Designed primarily for students preparing for higher degrees in history. Latin America since 1810.
HIS 201J
Sources & General Literature of History: American History to 1787
Consent of Instructor.
Designed primarily for students preparing for higher degrees in history. American History to 1787.
HIS 201K
Sources & General Literature of History: United States, 1787-1896
Consent of Instructor.
Designed primarily for students preparing for higher degrees in history. United States, 1787-1896.
HIS 201L
Sources & General Literature of History: United States Since 1896
Consent of Instructor.
Designed primarily for students preparing for higher degrees in history. United States since 1896.
HIS 201N
Sources & General Literature of History: Modern Japan
Consent of Instructor.
Designed primarily for students preparing for higher degrees in history. Modern Japan.
HIS 201P
Sources & General Literature of History: African Historiography
Consent of Instructor.
Designed primarily for students preparing for higher degrees in history. African Historiography.
HIS 201Q
Sources & General Literature of History: Cross-Cultural Women's History
Consent of Instructor.
Designed primarily for students preparing for higher degrees in history. Cross-Cultural Women's History.
HIS 201S
Sources & General Literature of History: History of Science & Medicine
Consent of Instructor.
Designed primarily for students preparing for higher degrees in history. History of Science and Medicine.
HIS 201T
Sources & General Literature of History: Jewish History
Consent of Instructor.
Designed primarily for students preparing for higher degrees in history. Jewish History.
HIS 201W
Sources & General Literature of History: Advanced Topics in World History
Consent of Instructor.
Designed primarily for students preparing for higher degrees in history. Advanced Topics in World History.
HIS 201X
Sources & General Literature of History: World History
Consent of Instructor.
Designed primarily for students preparing for higher degrees in history.(X)World History.
HIS 202A
Major Issues in Historical Interpretation: Ancient
Graduate standing.
Fundamental issues and debates in the study of history. Ancient. Readings, papers, and class reports.
HIS 202B
Major Issues in Historical Interpretation: Medieval Europe
Graduate standing.
Fundamental issues and debates in the study of history. Medieval Europe. Readings, papers, and class reports.
HIS 202C
Major Issues in Historical Interpretation: Modern Europe
Graduate standing.
Fundamental issues and debates in the study of history. Modern Europe. Readings, papers, and class reports.
HIS 202D
Major Issues in Historical Interpretation: India
Graduate standing.
Fundamental issues and debates in the study of history. India. Readings, papers, and class reports.
HIS 202E
Major Issues in Historical Interpretation: India
Graduate standing.
Fundamental issues and debates in the study of history. Africa. Readings, papers, and class reports.
HIS 202F
Major Issues in Historical Interpretation: China
Graduate standing.
Fundamental issues and debates in the study of history. China. Readings, papers, and class reports. 
HIS 202G
Major Issues in Historical Interpretation: Japan
Graduate standing.
Fundamental issues and debates in the study of history. Japan. Readings, papers, and class reports.
HIS 202H
Major Issues in Historical Interpretation: United States
Graduate standing.
Fundamental issues and debates in the study of history. United States. Readings, papers, and class reports.
HIS 202I
Major Issues in Historical Interpretation: Latin America
Graduate standing.
Fundamental issues and debates in the study of history. Latin America. Readings, papers, and class reports.
HIS 203B
Research Seminar
HIS 203A.
Designed for students preparing for higher degrees in history. Individual research and analysis resulting in substantial research paper of publishable quality. Completion required of all Ph.D. candidates. The three courses must be taken in continuous sequence, ordinarily during second year.
HIS 203C
Research Seminar
HIS 203A.
Designed for students preparing for higher degrees in History. Individual research and analysis resulting in substantial research paper of publishable quality. Completion required of all Ph.D. candidates. The three courses must be taken in continuous sequence, ordinarily during second year.
HIS 221
Medieval History
HIS 121A, HIS 121B, HIS 121C recommended.
Topics in the history of medieval and early Renaissance Europe.
HIS 245
Modern European History
HIS 201E.
Primary sources and research methodologies in the history of modern France and Germany. May be repeated once for credit.
HIS 261
Latin American History
Two courses in Latin American history; reading knowledge of Spanish or Portuguese.

HIS 271A
United States History
(HIS 201J,  HIS 201K,  HIS 201L) or HIS 202H.
Research in literature, methods, and sources on aspects of United States history, culminating in each student completing a research paper in the field by the end of the second quarter. 
HIS 271B
United States History
(HIS 201J,  HIS 201K,  HIS 201L) or HIS 202H.
Research in literature, methods, and sources on aspects of United States history, culminating in each student completing a research paper in the field by the end of the second quarter. 
HIS 291A
Chinese History
Consent of Instructor.
Research on topics to be chosen by the students for the purpose of writing article-length papers. 
HIS 291B
Chinese History
Consent of Instructor.
Completion of article-length papers on topics chosen by students. 
HIS 291C
Methods & Issues in Chinese History 
Consent of Instructor.  Reading knowledge of Chinese.
Readings in Chinese historical materials. Training in the use of Chinese reference works (including on-line resources). 
HIS 292
College Teaching Internship
HIS 300 (may be taken concurrently).
Student prepares and teaches one lower division history course in a nearby community college under the supervision of a UC Davis instructor and a community college instructor.
HIS 389
Introductory Seminar for Teaching Assistants
HIS 390 (can be concurrent);  HIS 390 required concurrently.
An introduction to the broad comparative and theoretical issues of teaching methods and techniques in history.
HMR 130
Special Topics in Human Rights
HMR 134 or RST 134 recommended.
Thematic study of human rights. Topics may include contemporary or historical issues in the promotion, protection, and violation of human rights; human rights and the arts, religion, literature are possible topical areas. 
HMR 131
Genocide
Upper division standing.
Comparative and critical study of the modern phenomenon of genocide from religious, ethical and historical perspectives. 
HMR 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Group study on focused topics in human rights. May be taught abroad.
HMR 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.
Opportunity for advanced undergraduate students to work with a faculty member in a focused manner on a topic or topics of human rights.
HMR 200A
History, Theory & Criticism of Human Rights
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.Restricted to graduate students.
Introduces the advanced study of Human Rights and the theoretical and practical elaboration of the international Human Rights system. Seminar engages with criticism of Human Rights and develops research and teaching within disciplinary and interdisciplinary frameworks.
HMR 200B
Memory, Culture, & Human Rights
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.Restricted to graduate students.
Explores the multiple convergences among memory, culture, and human rights. Discusses diverse approaches to how societal actors in different historical, cultural, and national settings, construct meanings of past political violence, inter-group conflicts, and human rights struggles.
HMR 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to graduate students.
Group study on focused topics in human rights. Four-unit courses may serve as electives for the Designated Emphasis in Human Rights.
HMR 299
Individual Study
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to graduate students.
Individual study for the designated emphasis in human rights.
HMR 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.Restricted to graduate students. 
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum. 
HNR 090X
Honors Discussion Section
Open only to students in the Davis Honors Challenge.
Examination of special topics in selected lower division courses through additional readings, discussions, term papers, collaborative work, or special activities, including projects, field and laboratory experiences, computer simulations, creative works.
HNR 092
Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Open only to students in the Davis Honors Challenge.
Supervised work experience under the auspices of the Davis Honors Challenge.
HNR 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.  Open to students in the Davis Honors Challenge.

HNR 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.  Student in the Davis Honors Challenge.

HNR 190X
Honors Contract
Open only to students in the Davis Honors Challenge.
In-depth examination of material in an upper division course as defined in an Honors Contract Proposal submitted by the student. Contract must be approved by the instructor and the Honors Council of the Academic Senate.
HNR 192
Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Open only to students in the Davis Honors Challenge.
Supervised work experience under the auspices of the Davis Honors Challenge.
HNR 194
Honors Seminar
Consent of Instructor.Open only to students in the Davis Honors Challenge.
Team-based work on actual problems drawn from the public or private sector. Focus on critical thinking and analytic interpretation, oral and written communication skills, and developement of practical solutions to real-world problems.
HNR 195
Honors Thesis/Honors Project
Open only to students in the Davis Honors Challenge.
Guided independent study of a selected topic leading to the presentation of an honors thesis/honors project.
HNR 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.  Open only to students in the Davis Honors Challenge.

HNR 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Open only to students in the Davis Honors Challenge.

HON 199
Research in Hematology-Oncology
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Experience in laboratory research.
HON 298
Topics in Hematology
One year of graduate work and/or consent of instructor.
Basic concepts of the physiology of the hematopoietic organ, the pathophysiology of hematopoietic disease, and concepts of therapeuticswill be offered for study. The specific topics to be dictated by the interest and background of the students.
HON 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.
Laboratory investigation contributing to the dissertation for a graduatedegree.
HON 420
Oncology
Approval by the SOM Committee on Student Promotions.Restricted to Medical student only; students must pass all Year 1 SOM courses.
Covers the principles of oncology and the pathophysiology of specific, common cancers correlated with organ systems pathophysiology and systemic pathology courses.
HON 460
Hematology-Oncology Consult Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year medical student in good academic standing.Limited enrollment.
Acting intern on inpatient hematology/oncology ward service.
HON 461
Hematology-Oncology Consult Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year medical student in good academic standing.Limited enrollment.
Student is an integral member of the inpatient hematology and oncology consult service, the bone marrow service, and will attend all conferences sponsored by the Division.
HON 462
Hematology-Oncology Ambulatory Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year medical student in good academic standing.Limited enrollment.
Outpatient rotations in related clinics. Participation with members of the subspecialty service in the initial clinical evaluation, work-up, management and follow-up of the patient with hematologic or oncologic disorders. 
HON 493
Cancer as a Process
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to UC Davis School of Medicine students only.
Covers cancer as a process, beginning with risks and prevention, preneoplasia, microinvasion, treatment options, metastases and systemic therapy, pain medicine and palliative care, and cancer communication. Format includes traditional lectures, student-led case discussions, and problem-based learning.  
HON 499
Research
Consent of Instructor.

HPH 098F
Student Facilitated Course
Consent of Instructor.
Student facilitated course intended primarily for lower division students.
HPH 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

HPH 115
Cannabis & Cannabinoids in Physiology & Medicine 
NPB 100 or NPB 101 or NPB 110B;  or Consent of Instructor.
In-depth scientific analysis of cannabis and cannabinoids, topics include biochemical, physiological, behavioral, pharmacological, social and therapeutic aspects of cannabinoids, with emphasis on the physiological impacts on major organ systems in humans and animals, and the potential medicinal uses.
HPH 157
Advanced Physiology of Animal/Human Disease
NPB 101 B+ or better or NPB 110C B+ or better;  Consent of Instructor.Limited to 35 students initially.
Centers on fundamental mechanisms and pathophysiological basis for animal and human diseases. Case-based and uses animal and human diseases to help exemplify the physiological consequences of organ dysfunction.
HPH 192
Internship in Human Physiology
Upper division standing; approval of project prior to period of internship by preceptor.
Supervised work experience in physiology and related fields.
HPH 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed reading, discussion and/or laboratory experience on selected topics.
HPH 198F
Student Faciliated Course
Consent of Instructor.
Student facilitated course intended primarily for upper division students.
HPH 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.  Senior standing in biology, chemistry, physics, psychology, or engineering.

HPH 199FA
Student Facilitated Course Development
Consent of Instructor.
Under the supervision of a faculty member, an undergraduate student plans and develops the course they will teach under 098F/198F.
HPH 199FB
Student Facilitated Teaching
Consent of Instructor.
Under the supervision of a faculty member, an undergraduate student teaches a course under 098F/198F.
HPH 210A
Advanced Physiology
Physiology Ph.D. program or consent of instructor.HPH 210A (or MCP 210A) is a required core course for the MCIP graduate group; course contains thermodynamics discussions and requires substantial math and physics background in order to succeed; approval for registering from Co-IRs is required to get CRN. 
Advanced course on fundamental principles of cell physiology, transport physiology, signal transduction, physiology of excitable cells, and muscle physiology.
HPH 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
For graduate students desiring to explore particular topics in depth.Lectures and conferences may be involved.
HPH 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.

HPH 403
Medical Neuroanatomy
HPH 400;  Block 1.Restricted to medical students only.
Anatomy of the normal human nervous system, to include gross external and internal morphology of brain and spinal cord, and function neuroanatomy of motor, sensory and cognitive systems. Incorporates application of neuroanatomy to clinical problem solving.
HPH 440
Cannabis & Cannabinoids in Physiology & Medicine 
Consent of Instructor.
Provides an in-depth scientific analysis of current knowledge on cannabis and cannabinoids pertaining to human physiology and potential medicinal uses.
HPH 493
Physiological Principles in SICU SSM
Consent of Instructor.  Restricted to UC Davis School of Medicine students only.
Special Study Module, a four-week course on the topic: Care of the Critically Ill Surgical Patient: Use of Physiological Principles to Guide Treatment of Patients with Common Surgical Problems.
HPH 497T
Tutoring in Human Physiology 
Advanced standing or consent of instructor.
Assist instructor by tutoring medical students in preparation for one of the departmental courses that is a component of the required curriculum of the School of Medicine.
HPH 498
Directed Reading & Group Study
Consent of Instructor.  Medical student.
Directed reading and discussion on selected topics in human physiology.
HPH 499
Research
Medical students with consent of instructor.
Laboratory investigation on selected topics.
HRT 200A
Horticulture & Agronomy: Principles 
Graduate standing.
Core course to introduce students to the principles that are of general importance in horticultural and agronomic research, including agroecology, plant developmental physiology, crop improvement, and biotechnology. Generally taken in the first year of the graduate program. 
HRT 200B
Horticulture & Agronomy: Practices
HRT 200A recommended; graduate standing.
Introduction to horticultural and agronomic cropping systems.  Covers current applied research within agroecology, crop improvement, crop production, postharvest biology.  
HRT 203
Research Perspectives in Horticulture
Graduate standing.
Following lectures/discussions of scientific methodology, students develop research proposals aided by classroom discussions and individual interactions with instructors. Lectures and critiques of classical papers provide a sense of the evolution of the current concepts in perennial plant biology.
HRT 251
Modeling Horticultural Systems
PLS 142;  or Consent of Instructor.  Calculus.
Development and application of models.  Emphasis on physiological and ecological models, with examples from areas of interest to class participants.  Applications to horticultural systems.
HRT 290
Seminar
Graduate standing at UC Davis.
Seminars presented by invited speakers, students, or faculty on selected topics in horticulture.
HRT 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.
Research.
HUM 001D
Issues and Concepts in the Humanities
HUM 001 (can be concurrent);  HUM 001 required concurrently.
Small group discussions and preparation of short papers for course 1.
HUM 001D
Issues & Concepts in the Humanities
HUM 001 (can be concurrent);  HUM 001 required concurrently.Concurrent enrollment in HUM 001 required. 
Small group discussions and preparation of short papers for HUM 001.
HUM 003
Medicine & Humanities
Satisfaction of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Evolution of the "medical arts" into the "science of medicine." Culture of medicine in the context of society, medical ethics.
HUM 004D
Animals & Human Culture: Discussion
HUM 004 (can be concurrent);  HUM 004 required concurrently.
Small group discussions and preparation of short papers for HUM 004.
HUM 007
Travel & Travel Literature
Satisfaction of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
History of travel from the age of exploration to the modern era. Contemporary trends in travel, including mas tourism, adventure travel, and ecotravel.  Social, economic, and cultural issues related to modern trends in travel. Analysis of literary representations of travel.
HUM 008
Introduction to Perspectives on Narrative
Satisfaction of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Interdisciplinary approach to the use of story across time, culture, and discipline. How the telling and retelling of particular stories reflect the values, concerns, and assumptions of their original audiences and genres.
HUM 009D
Don Quixote & the Modern World Discussion
HUM 009 (can be concurrent);  HUM 009 required concurrently.
Small group discussions and preparation of short papers for HUM 009.
HUM 060
Narrative & Argumentative Approaches to Major Current Issues in the Media, Culture, & Society
English A or the equivalent.
Interdisciplinary approach to contemporary issues (abortion, AIDS, civil rights, war and peace, welfare state) around which individuals, communities and institutions define themselves in American society, by applying principles of narrative theory to the narratives where those issues are embedded.
HUM 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.
HUM 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

HUM 250
Topics in the Humanities
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Topics in the humanities, selected by the instructor.
HUM 292
Graduate Internship
Consent of Instructor.
Individually designed supervised internship, off campus, in community or institutional setting.  Developed with advice of faculty mentor.
HUM 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

HYD 092
Hydrologic Science Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division student.
Work experience off and on campus in Hydrologic Science. Internship supervised by a member of the faculty.
HYD 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

HYD 103N
Fluid Mechanics Fundamentals
PHY 009B.
Fluid mechanics axioms, fluid statics, kinematics, velocity fields for one-dimensional incompressible flow and boundary layers, turbulent flow time averaging, potential flow, dimensional analysis, and macroscopic balances to solve a range of practical problems.
HYD 110
Irrigation Principles & Practices
PHY 007A;  SSC 100 recommended.
General course for agricultural and engineering students dealing with soil and plant aspects of irrigation and drainage. Soil-water principles including water movement, plant responses to irrigation regimes, water use by crops; also irrigation systems and water quality.
HYD 118
Evapotranspiration Principles, Measurement & Modeling
HYD 124 C or better;  Consent of Instructor.
Estimation of evapotranspiration (ET) for irrigation management and water resources planning; including the basic principles and key factors controlling evaporation and ET rates, methods of measuring these factors in the field and remotely, and determination of likely water requirements for crops and various landscape conditions as needed for water resources planning.  
HYD 124
Plant-Water-Soil Relationships
(SSC 100 (can be concurrent) or SSC 107 (can be concurrent));  (PLS 100A (can be concurrent) or PLB 111 (can be concurrent));  or Consent of Instructor.
Principles of plant interactions with soil and atmospheric water environments and practical applications to crop management (e.g., irrigation) and plant eco-physiology (e.g., drought). 
HYD 134
Aqueous Geochemistry
CHE 002B.
Chemistry of natural waters; dielectric properties of water; thermodynamic and mass-action relations; metal hydrolysis; acid-base equilibria; metal-coordination chemistry; solubility calculations; electron-exchange reactions; sorptive partitioning; ion exchange; and dissolved organic matter.
HYD 141
Physical Hydrology
PHY 009B;  MAT 021B;  HYD 100 recommended.
Introduction to the processes that constitute the hydrologic cycle. Special emphasis on a quantitative description of the following processes: precipitation, infiltration, evaporation, transpiration, surface runoff, and groundwater runoff.
HYD 142
Systems Hydrology
HYD 141 or ECI 142.
General course considering hydrologic processes from a systems or statistical model perspective. General probability concepts are applied to frequency, time series and spatial data analysis. Linear systems are also considered in conjunction with Kalman filter techniques.
HYD 143
Ecohydrology
HYD 010 or HYD 141 or ESP 001 or ESM 100 or ESM 108 or ESM 120 or GEL 001 or GEL 050 or SSC 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Movement and storage of water in individual ecosystems and the integrated functioning of water and biota at the watershed scale.
HYD 144
Groundwater Hydrology
MAT 016B or MAT 021A;  HYD 103 or ENG 103 recommended.
Fundamentals of groundwater flow and contaminant hydrology. Occurrence, distribution, and movement of groundwater. Well-flow systems. Aquifer tests. Well construction operation and maintenance. Groundwater exploration and quality assessment. Agricultural threats to groundwater quality: fertilizers, pesticides, salts. 
HYD 145
Water Science & Design
(HYD 141 or ESM 100);  (MAT 016B or MAT 021B);  or Consent of Instructor.
Introduction to watershed engineering, storm water management, design of hydraulic systems. Topics include hydrological risk analysis, flood routing, design storms, open channel flow, pipes, culverts, spillways, and detention basins. Class project and field trips will apply theory to real-life problems.
HYD 146
Hydrogeology & Contaminant Transport
HYD 144 or ECI 144;  Or the equivalent.
Physical and chemical processes affecting groundwater flow and contaminant transport, with emphasis on realistic hydrogeologic systems. Groundwater geology and chemistry. Fundamentals of groundwater flow and transport analysis. Laboratory includes field pumping test and work with physical and computer models.
HYD 147
Runoff, Erosion & Water Quality Management 
(PHY 007B or PHY 009B);  (MAT 016C or MAT 017C or MAT 021C);  (ECI 142 or HYD 141 or ESM 100);  or equivalent.
Practical hydrology and runoff water quality management from disturbed watersheds. Development of hillslope and soils restoration concepts and practice, modeling and application.
HYD 150
Water Law
Consent of instructor or upper division standing.
Principles and issues of California Water Law.Types of water rights, groundwater rights and management, and protection of instream uses.Water projects, role of federal government and federal/state relations. Basic water quality acts, endangered species act, water transfers and current water issues.
HYD 151
Field Methods in Hydrology
ERS 100 or HYD 141.
Measurement methods and data analysis for evaluation of water storage, movement and contamination in the field.  Equipment such as data loggers, water and sediment samplers, pressure transducers, weather stations, surveying equipment, and flow meters will be used.
HYD 182
Environmental Analysis using GIS
ABT 150 or LDA 150;  Or equivalent GIS experience and skills; general biology and/or ecology courses are recommended.
Ecosystem and landscape modeling with emphasis on hydrology and solute transport. Spatial analysis of environmental risk analysis including ecological risk assessment, natural resource management. Spatial database structures, scripting, data models, and error analysis in GIS.
HYD 192
Hydrologic Science Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of 84 units.
Work experience off and on campus in water science. Internship supervised by a member of the faculty.
HYD 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduate
Senior standing.

HYD 205
Continuum Mechanics of Natural Systems
MAT 021D;  MAT 022B;  PHY 009B.
Continuum mechanics of static and dynamic air, water, earth and biological systems using hydraulic, heat and electrical conductivity; diffusivity; dispersion; strain; stress; deformation gradient; velocity gradient; stretch and spin tensors.
HYD 205
Continuum Mechanics of Natural Systems
MAT 021D;  MAT 022B;  PHY 009B.
Continuum mechanics of static and dynamic air, water, earth and biological systems using hydraulic, heat and electrical conductivity; diffusivity; dispersion; strain; stress; deformation gradient; velocity gradient; stretch and spin tensors.
HYD 210
Vadose Modeling & Characterization
SSC 107;  or Consent of Instructor.
Principles and modeling of water flow and chemical transport in the vadose zone, with specific applications to soils. Topics include hydraulic properties, finite difference application to unsaturated water flow, parameter optimization, diffusive and convective transport in gaseous and liquid phases.
HYD 243
Water Resource Planning & Management
HYD 141 or ECI 142.
Applications of deterministic and stochastic mathematical programming techniques to water resource planning, analysis, design and management. Water allocation, capacity expansion, and reservoir operation. Conjunctive use of surface water and groundwater. Water quality management. Irrigation planning and operation models.
HYD 252
Hillslope Geomorphology & Sediment Budgets
HYD 141 or GEL 035 or ECI 142;  or Consent of Instructor.
Exploration of theoretical and empirical foundations of sediment production on hillslopes using computer models and field experiments to promote an understanding of how watersheds evolve naturally and with human impacts.
HYD 256
Geomorphology of Estuaries & Deltas
HYD 141 or GEL 035;  or ECI 042 or Consent of Instructor.
Survey of the processes and landforms associated with sediment deposition in the coastal zone. Application of geomorphic principles to coastal management issues.
HYD 264
Modeling of Hydrologic Processes
HYD 141;  STA 102;  Or the equivalents.
Techniques used to model the spatio-temporal structure of rainfall and runoff are introduced. Procedures studied include those based on stochastic point processes, chaos theory, fractal geometry, and fractional noises.
HYD 269
Numerical Modeling of Groundwater Systems
MAT 022B;  (ECI 144;  or HYD 145A); HYD 145B;.
Finite difference and finite element techniques in modeling groundwater flow and transport. Fundamentals of constructing and calibrating models with hands-on applications. Methods and limitations of numerical solution of transport equations. Model interpretation and ethics.
HYD 273
Introduction to Geostatistics
STA 130A;  STA 130B;  Or the equivalent.
Statistical treatment of spatial data with hydrologic emphasis. Topics: theory of random functions, variogram analysis, Kriging/co-Kriging, indicator geostatistics, and stochastic simulation of spatial variability. Geostatistical software use.
HYD 274
Practice of Groundwater Flow & Transport Modeling 
HYD 269;  (ECI 272B or ECI 272C).
Selecting and building groundwater flow and transport models. Planning, preparation, execution, presentation, and review of modeling projects. Review of methods, assumptions, and limitations of groundwater models; practicing with MODFLOW, MT3D, associated GUI, and with other groundwater modeling software of choice.
HYD 275
Analysis of Spatial Processes
STA 102;  Or the equivalent; HYD 273 or STA 273A recommended.
Characterization of homogeneous random fields; extremes and spectral parameters; geometry of excursions, local averaging; scale of fluctuation; non-Gaussian and irregular random fields; geostatisticalapplications.
HYD 286
Selected Topics in Environmental Remote Sensing
ERS 186;  Consent of Instructor.  Or equivalent; ERS 186L recommended.
In depth investigation of advanced topics in remote sensing applications, measurements, and theory.
HYD 290
Seminar in Hydrologic Science
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing and background in Hydrologic Science.
Seminars and critical review of problems, issues, and research in hydrologic sciences. Oral presentations of research. Topics vary.
HYD 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

HYD 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

HYD 440
Hazardous Waste Operations Training
Upper division standing in College of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences.
Forty-hour course designed to meet the requirements of Federal OSHA
IAD 092
Internship
Consent of Instructor.
Supervised internship, off and on campus, in community and institutional settings.
IAD 103
Social Change & Agricultural Development
Introductory social science course (Anthropology (ANT), Sociology (SOC), Economics (ECN), International Agricultural Development (IAD)).
How social and cultural factors influence technological change in agriculture; theories of diffusion of innovations; social impact analysis and technology assessment.
IAD 160
Agroforestry: Global & Local Perspectives
PLS 002 or BIS 001C or BIS 002C;  (PLS 142 or PLS 150 or BIS 002B);  Or general ecology course in lieu of PLS 142 or PLS 150 or BIS 002B.
Traditional and evolving use of trees in agricultural ecosystems; their multiple roles in environmental stabilization and production of food, fuel, and fiber; and socioeconomic barriers to the adoption and implementation of agroforestry practices.
IAD 170
Program Development for International Agriculture
IAD 010.
Principles of leadership and management for international agricultural development. Organizations and organizational behavior, and the implications for planning and administering organizations involved in the global development effort.
IAD 192
Internship
Consent of Instructor.
Supervised internship, off and on campus, in community and institutional settings.
IAD 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study.
IAD 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.
Special study for advanced undergraduates.
IAD 201
Economics of Small Farms & Farming Systems
ARE 100A or ECN 100;  or the equivalent.
Economic perspective on small farm development. Establishes a basis for predicting farmers' responses to changes in the economic environment, and for proposing government policies to increase small farm production and improve farmer and national welfare.
IAD 202N
Analysis & Determinants of Farming Systems
PLS 110C or PLS 111;  or the equivalent.
Unifying concepts of cropping systems in temperate and tropical climatic zones; agroecosystems stability, diversity and sustainability; management strategies, resource use efficiency and their interactions; role of animals, their impact on energy use efficiency, nutrient cycling, and providing food and power..
IAD 203N
Project Planning & Evaluation
IAD 200N;  or Consent of Instructor.
Interdisciplinary setting for application of student skills and specialization to a "real world" development project. Focus on team-building and effective interdisciplinary problem-solving methods, with the objective of producing a project document and presentation within a specified deadline. 
IAD 290
Seminar in International Agricultural Development
Consent of Instructor.
Discussion and critical evaluation of advanced topics and issues in international agricultural development.
IAD 291
Topics in International Agricultural Development
Consent of Instructor.
Selected topics dealing with current issues in agricultural development in lesser developed nations. Variable content.
IAD 292
Graduate Internship
Participation in H. Humphrey Fellow Program or consent of instructor.
Individually designed supervised internship, off or on campus, in community, business or institutional setting. Developed with advice of faculty mentor and Humphrey Coordinator.
IAD 298
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study.
IAD 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.
Research.
IAD 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Graduate standing.
Teaching assistant training practicum.
ICL 201
Orientation in United States Law
Law school education or equivalent.
Investigation of the Common Law System of the United States. Includes structure of the U.S. government, Constitutional law, contracts, torts, real property, consumer law, securities law, intellectual property, antitrust, taxation, labor law, environmental law, ethics, remedies, legal research and trial practice.
ICL 201A
Fundamentals in United States Law
Law school education or equivalent.
Investigation of the Common Law System of the U.S. Includes the American constitutional system, the American judiciary, the American civil trial, and foundational substantive and procedural law such as real property, torts, criminal law and procedure, civil procedure, and contracts.
ICL 201B
Advanced Topics in United States Law
Law school education or equivalent.
Orientation to advanced topics in U.S. law: Intellectual Property (including copyright and trademarks), Commercial and Consumer Law, Advanced Contracts, Antitrust, Taxation, Remedies, Labor Law, Environmental Law, Dispute Resolution, Remedies and introduction to trial techniques and legal research/writing.
ICL 202
Introduction to Contracts
Law school education or equivalent.
Examines sorts of promises that are enforced and the nature of protection given promissory obligations in both commercial and noncommercial transactions. Inquiry is made into the means by which traditional doctrine adjusts to changing social demands. 
ICL 202A
Introduction to Contracts Formation
Law school education or equivalent.
Examines formation of the sorts of promises that are enforced and the nature of protection given promissory obligations in both commercial and noncommercial transactions. Inquiry is made into the means by which traditional doctrine adjusts to changing social demands. 
ICL 202AS
Introduction to Contracts Formation
Law school education or equivalent.
Examines formation of the sorts of promises that are enforced and the nature of protection given promissory obligations in both commercial and noncommercial transactions. Inquiry is made into the means by which traditional doctrine adjusts to changing social demands.
ICL 202B
Contracts Performance
Law school education or equivalent.
Examines issues of performing promises that are enforceable and possible breach of promissory obligations in both commercial and noncommercial transactions. Inquiry is made into the means by which traditional doctrine adjusts to changing social demands. 
ICL 202BS
Contract Performance
ICL 202A;  Or equivalent; Law school education or equivalent.
Examines issues of performing promises that are enforceable and possible breach of promissory obligations in both commercial and noncommercial transactions. Inquiry is made into the means by which traditional doctrine adjusts to changing social demands.
ICL 203
Civil Procedure
Law school education or equivalent.
Study of the fundamental and recurrent problems in civil actions including the methods used by federal and state courts to resolve civil disputes.
ICL 204
International Joint Ventures
ICL 201;  Law school education or equivalent.
International and U.S. business and legal transactions. Legal planning, problem solving, decision making and negotiations related to the break-up and dissolution of a major international joint venture. U.S. laws including finance, tax, bankruptcy, labor, antitrust, environmental, corporate structures and intellectual property. Offered every three years.
ICL 205
Introduction to Constitutional Law
Law school education or equivalent.
Principles, doctrines and controversies regarding the structure and division of powers in American government. Includes judicial review, jurisdiction, standing to sue, federalism, federal and state powers and immunities, and the separation of powers among branches of the federal government.
ICL 205A
Overview of US Constitutional Law
Law school education or equivalent.
Principles, doctrines and controversies regarding the structure and division of powers in American government. Includes judicial review, jurisdiction, standing to sue, federalism, federal and state powers and immunities, and the separation of powers among branches of the federal government.
ICL 205AS
Overview of US Constitutional Law
Law school education or equivalent.
Principles, doctrines and controversies regarding the structure and division of powers in American government. Includes judicial review, jurisdiction, standing to sue, federalism, federal and state powers and immunities, and the separation of powers among branches of the federal government.
ICL 205B
Constitutional Law - Protection of Individual Rights
Law school education or equivalent.
Principles, doctrines and controversies regarding the U.S. Constitution Bill of Rights, including due process of law, equal protection, freedom of expression, freedom of religion, state action, and congressional legislation in aid of civil rights and liberties.
ICL 211
Negotiations & Alternative Dispute Resolution
ICL 201;  Law school education or the equivalent.
Mechanisms for resolving disputes including the alternatives to litigation such as negotiation, mediation, and arbitration. Advantages and disadvantages of each approach. Offered every three years.
ICL 212
Introduction to Negotiation
Law school education or equivalent.
Introduction to theoretical and empirical approaches to negotiation for the purposes of making deals and resolving legal disputes. 
ICL 212S
Introduction to Negotiation
Law school education or equivalent.
Introduction to theoretical and empirical approaches to negotiation for the purposes of making deals and resolving legal disputes. 
ICL 214
Advanced Negotiation
Law school education or equivalent.
Principles and empirical approaches to advanced negotiations including negotiation framework, models, styles, multiple party/issue negotiations and settlements. 
ICL 214S
Advanced Negotiation
Law school education or equivalent.
Principles and empirical approaches to advanced negotiations including negotiation framework, models, styles, multiple party/issue negotiations and settlements. 
ICL 215
Business Associations
ICL 201;  Law school education or the equivalent.
Legal rules and concepts applicable to business associations including general partnerships, joint ventures, limited partnerships, limited liability entities, and sole proprietorships.
ICL 215S
Business Associations
ICL 201;  Law school education or the equivalent.
Legal rules and concepts applicable to business associations including general partnerships, joint ventures, limited partnerships, limited liability entities, and sole proprietorships.
ICL 216
International Business Transactions
ICL 201;  Law school education or the equivalent.
Legal problems arising from international business transactions. Focus on international sales contracts, choice of law, forum selection clauses, letters of credit, transfers of technology, regulation of bribery, development of joint ventures, repatriation of profits, foreign exchange problems, and national efforts to control imports.
ICL 217
Alternative Dispute Resolution
Law school education or equivalent.
Introduces students to a wide variety of alternative dispute resolution procedures, with an in-depth emphasis on negotiation, mediation and arbitration. 
ICL 219
Advanced Writing Project
ICL 201;  Law school education or the equivalent.
The completion of a written research project under the active supervision of a faculty member in satisfaction of the research-writing requirement.
ICL 220
United States Taxation of Multinational Investments
ICL 201;  Law school education or the equivalent.
An analysis of the United States taxation of multinational investments including jurisdiction of tax, the U.S. tax system, foreign tax credits, treaties, and transfer pricing.
ICL 227
Criminal Procedure
Law school education or equivalent.
Federal constitutional limits on government authority to gather evidence and investigate crime. Includes Fourth Amendment limits on search, seizure, and arrest; Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination; Sixth Amendment right to counsel.
ICL 228A
Mergers & Acquisitions Law
Law school education or equivalent.
Practical approach to mergers and acquisitions with an in-depth look at the planning, negotiation and completion of mergers and acquisitions.
ICL 228AS
Mergers & Acquisitions Law
Law school education or equivalent.
Practical approach to mergers and acquisitions with an in-depth look at the planning, negotiation and completion of mergers and acquisitions.
ICL 236
United States Securities Law & Regulation
ICL 201;  Law school education or the equivalent.
Structural and jurisdictional issues associated with securities practice. Topics include the regulation of public offerings, transactions by corporate insiders, regulation of corporate disclosure and conduct, and the liabilities of corporations and individuals under anti-fraud provisions.
ICL 239
Mediation
Law school education or equivalent.
Introduction to the mediation process. Development of communication skills, the ability to analyze disputes, to understand why mediations succeed or fail, and understand the advantages and limitations of mediation as a method of resolving disputes. 
ICL 242
Private International Law
ICL 201;  Law school education or the equivalent.
Operating law across national borders; emphasis on methods of resolving international disputes. International aspects of jurisdiction, choice of law, judgment enforcement, forum choice, process service, taking of evidence, foreign sovereign immunity, extraterritorial regulation of antitrust, securities; other national laws.
ICL 242S
Private International Law
ICL 201;  Law school education or the equivalent.
Operating law across national borders; emphasis on methods of resolving international disputes. International aspects of jurisdiction, choice of law, judgment enforcement, forum choice, process service, taking of evidence, foreign sovereign immunity, extraterritorial regulation of antitrust, securities; other national laws.
ICL 247
Banking Law
ICL 201;  Law school education or the equivalent.
Institutional features of international banking transactions, the structure of a large financial deal, and the mechanics of overseeing large loans. Emphasis on negotiable instruments such as bills of lading, letters of credit, standby letters of credit, and interbank transactions. Offered every three years.
ICL 249
Comparative Law
ICL 201;  Law school education or the equivalent.
A comparative study of the development of schools of legal thought, chiefly Common law systems and Civil law traditions. Attention to the historical reasons for their divergence, contemporary aproaches to universal problems such as succession, torts, and contracts, the cross-fertilization of laws and difficulties commonly associated with importing foreign law into new territory.
ICL 250
International Trade Law
ICL 201;  Law school education or the equivalent.
An investigation of global trading systems including international trade in goods and services, e-commerce, international intellectual property, international tax planning and investment. Includes substantive and procedural provisions of the World Trade Organization (WTO) and the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). Offered every three years.
ICL 251
United States Litigation Issues
ICL 201;  Law school education or the equivalent.
Prevention and resolution of disputes in international commerce. Emphasis on preparing for a trial in the United States. Includes the study of pre-trial motions, jury selection, opening statements, rules of evidence, closing arguments, and the selection of appropriate strategies. Offered every three years.
ICL 262
Antitrust
ICL 201;  Law school education or the equivalent.
Historical and institutional background of Antitrust law in the United States. The statutory framework including price fixing, limits on distribution, monopolization and mergers, and reporting requirements.
ICL 270
Financing International Transactions
ICL 201;  Law school education or the equivalent.
How capital is raised in international markets. Investment strategies for U.S. markets. Taxation of financial investments, international currency regulation, and assessing rates of return on international investments. Offered every three years.
ICL 274
Intellectual Property
ICL 201;  Law school education or the equivalent.
Intensive study of intellectual property law. Including copyright, trademark and patent law and unfair competition.
ICL 274S
Intellectual Property
ICL 201;  Law school education or the equivalent.
Intensive study of intellectual property law. Including copyright, trademark and patent law and unfair competition.
ICL 283
Contract Remedies
Law school education or equivalent.
Covers a range of remedies for contract breach: remedies under common law and equity, liquidated damages clauses, remedies for mistake and unconscionability as well as breach of contract for the Sale of Goods under UCC Article II.
ICL 283S
Contract Remedies
ICL 202A;  ICL 202B;  Or equivalent; Law School education or equivalent.
Covers a range of remedies for contract breach: remedies under common law and equity, liquidated damages clauses, remedies for mistake and unconscionability as well as breach of contract for the Sale of Goods under UCC Article II. 
ICL 285
Environmental Law
Law school education or equivalent.
Introduction to federal and state environmental law. Historical development of environmental law; the role of courts, the legislature and the executive branch in the development and implementation of environmental policy. Review of major statutes.
ICL 289
Licensing Academy in Intellectual Property & Technology Commercialization
ICL 201;  Law School education or equivalent.
Intellectual property as it relates to current forms of legal protection and how new innovations fit into these models, including public-private technology transfer, patents, institutional objectives, technology transfer offices, startups, and licenses.
ICL 290
American Legal System Research Seminar
ICL 201;  Law School education or equivalent.
American legal system and its structure. Legal research methodologies and presentation with attention to analysis, synthesis, organization, and editing techniques common to legal writing.
ICL 291C
International Commercial Law Seminar
ICL 201;  Law School education or equivalent.
Advanced seminar on a current topic in International Commercial Law. Offered at the University of Cologne in Cologne, Germany for two weeks each summer. 
ICL 292
International Commercial Law Seminar
Law school education or equivalent.
Advanced seminar in a current topic in International Commercial Law. Topic changes each year course is offered.
ICL 292S
International Commercial Law Seminar
Law school education or equivalent.
Advanced seminar in a current topic in International Commercial Law.  Topic changes each year course is offered.
ICL 299
Advanced Research in Legal Problems
ICL 201;  Law School education or equivalent.Permission of supervising instructor.
Student individualized research projects under faculty supervision.
IDI 141
Infectious Diseases of Humans
Introductory knowledge in biology and chemistry recommended.
Integrates information on biological and molecular nature of the causative organism, modern diagnostics, treatment and prevention strategies, and the role of infectious diseases in contemporary society and throughout human history.
IDI 199
Infectious Diseases Research
Consent of Instructor.  Chemistry through organic chemistry (in addition, physical and biochemistry preferred), biology through basic bacteriology (in addition, microbiology and immunology preferred).
Discrete problem requiring reading and actual manual effort in solution will be assigned to each student. Progress and results will be reviewed at intervals with instructor and via seminar presentation.
IDI 211
Epidemiology & Prevention of Infectious Diseases
EPI 205B;  (EPI 207;  or IMD 421).
Infectious disease epidemiology and prevention, with equal emphasis on human and veterinary diseases. Major categories of infectious diseases by mode of transmission.
IDI 299
Research in Infectious Diseases
Consent of Instructor.
Laboratory investigation contributing to the dissertation for a graduatedegree.
IDI 440
Introduction to AIDS & Related Disorders
First- and second-year medical students must be in good academic standing and have consent from the instructor.
Familiarizes students with the diagnosis and treatment of individuals infected with the human immunodeficiency virus. Interview patients, observe patient care and participate in ongoing clinic research as well as examine alternative lifestyles.
IDI 450
Clinical & Social Care of the Injection Drug User
Consent of Instructor.  First- and second-year medical students in good academic standing.
Lecture and guided clinical practice in a supervised clinical setting, focusing on the social and medical aspects of health care for injection drug users.
IDI 460
Infectious Diseases Clinical Clerkship
Successful completion of two years of study in an accredited medical school.Limited enrollment with priority to fourth-year medical students. 
Patients ill with infectious diseases, including AIDS, will be evaluated and presented at rounds and case conferences. Patients are also seen in the Infectious Diseases Clinic. Instruction in clinical microbiology and the proper use of the laboratory will be provided.
IDI 499
Research Topics in Infectious Disease
Successful completion of the first-year of study in School of Medicine, graduate students (approved for graduate credit), and/or consent of instructor.
Discrete problem requiring reading and actual manual effort in solution will be assigned to each student. Progress and results to be reviewed at
IMD 092
Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.
Supervised internship in internal medicine and related fields.
IMD 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.
Directed group study in medicine and related fields.
IMD 099
Undergraduate Research in Medicine: Molecular & Cell Biology 
Consent of Instructor.

IMD 192
Internship in Internal Medicine
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Supervised work experience in internal medicine and related fields.
IMD 194
Practicum in Community Health Clinics
Consent of Instructor.
The undergraduate student, through active participation in the medical aspects of community health clinics, gains knowledge of the organization, administration, and problem-solving capabilities of these primary care facilities.
IMD 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study in medicine and related fields.
IMD 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.

IMD 220D
Cardiovascular System
HPH 200;  and Consent of Instructor.  Graduate student status.
Principles of etiology, mechanisms, diagnosis and management of the major diseases of the cardiovascular system.  Included are ischemic, valvular, hypertensive, cardiomyopathic, pericardial, and electrical disorders.
IMD 416
Summer Institute on Race & Health
Consent of Instructor.Limited enrollment.
Using field trips, media, readings, and clinical experiences, eight-ten first-year medical students explore issues of race, health disparities and related issues in a four-week institute during the summer break.
IMD 420A
Hematology
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to Medical students only.
Malignant disorders of blood cells and transfusion therapy. Covers acute leukemia, myelodysplasia, myeloproliferative disorders, lymphoma, and myeloma. 
IMD 420B
Gastrointestinal System
Approval of Committee on Student Progress.Restricted to Medical students only.
Basic pathophysiologic principles of digestive diseases on which clinical concepts and judgments can be developed. Emphasis on pathophysiologic basis of gastroenterological and hepatic disorders with discussion of major disorders and their diagnosis and management.
IMD 420C
Pulmonary & Critical Care Medicine
Approval of SOM's Committee on Student Promotions.Restricted to Medical students only; student must pass all SOM Year 1 courses.
Clinical aspects of respiratory anatomy, physiology, and pathology. Diagnostic procedures and a description of the major pulmonary diseases & disorders, and critical care medicine.
IMD 420D
Cardiovascular System
Approval of the School of Medicine Committee on Student Promotions.Restricted to Medical students only; student must pass all SOM Year 1 courses.
Principles of etiology, mechanisms, diagnosis and management of the major diseases of the cardiovascular system. Included are ischemic, valvular, hypertensive, cardiomyopathic, pericardial, and electrical disorders.
IMD 420E
Nephrology
Approval of Student Progress Committee.
Fundamental aspects of disorders of body water, electrolytes and acid/base balance; major categories and mechanisms of parenchymal renal diseases; urinary tract infections.
IMD 430
Medicine Clerkship
Approval by School of Medicine Committee on Student Progress.
Clerkship is divided into two, four-week blocks, one each at UCDMC and at Kaiser Hospitals.  Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty.  On-going patient write-ups, rounds, conferences are required.
IMD 430FA
SJVP Longitudinal Medicine Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.  Approval by School of Medicine Committee on Student Progress.
Longitudinal Clerkship runs concurrently with Family Medicine, Pediatrics and Psychiatry for 32 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. On-going patient write-ups, rounds, conferences are required.
IMD 430FB
SJVP Longitudinal Medicine Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.  Approval by School of Medicine Committee on Student Progress.
Longitudinal Clerkship runs concurrently with Family Medicine, Pediatrics and Psychiatry for 32 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. On-going patient write-ups, rounds, conferences are required.
IMD 430FC
SJVP Longitudinal Medicine Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.  Approval by School of Medicine Committee on Student Progress.
Longitudinal Clerkship runs concurrently with Family Medicine, Pediatrics and Psychiatry for 32 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. On-going patient write-ups, rounds, conferences are required.
IMD 430FD
SJVP Longitudinal Medicine Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.  Approval by School of Medicine Committee on Student Progress.
Longitudinal Clerkship runs concurrently with Family Medicine, Pediatrics and Psychiatry for 32 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. On-going patient write-ups, rounds, conferences are required.
IMD 430R
Rural PRIME Internal Medicine Longitudinal Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.
Internal Medicine Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
IMD 430RA
Rural PRIME Internal Medicine Longitudinal Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.
Internal Medicine Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
IMD 430RB
Rural PRIME Internal Medicine Longitudinal Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.
Internal Medicine Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
IMD 430RC
Rural PRIME Internal Medicine Longitudinal Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.
Internal Medicine Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
IMD 430RD
Rural PRIME Internal Medicine Longitudinal Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.
Internal Medicine Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
IMD 430TA
TeachMS Longitudinal Medicine Clerkship (A)
Consent of Instructor.  Approval by School of Medicine Committee on Student Progress.
Longitudinal Clerkship runs concurrently with Primary Care and Psychiatry for 24 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. On-going patient write-ups, rounds, conferences are required.
IMD 430TB
TeachMS Longitudinal Medicine Clerkship (B)
Consent of Instructor.  Approval by School of Medicine Committee on Student Progress.
Longitudinal Clerkship runs concurrently with Primary Care and Psychiatry for 24 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. On-going patient write-ups, rounds, conferences are required.
IMD 430TC
TeachMS Longitudinal Medicine Clerkship (C)
Consent of Instructor.  Approval by School of Medicine Committee on Student Progress.
Longitudinal Clerkship runs concurrently with Primary Care and Psychiatry for 24 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. On-going patient write-ups, rounds, conferences are required.
IMD 439D
Directed Clinical Studies in Internal Medicine
Consent of Instructor.
Individual directed studies in extended preparation for modified curriculum or to complete a clinical rotation following a leave of absence.
IMD 439R
Directed Studies in Internal Medicine
Consent of Instructor.
Individual directed studies in extended preparation for remediation of all or part of clinical rotation. Clinical studies to accommodate and satisfy remedial work as directed by the Committee on Student Progress and approved by the course IOR.
IMD 450A
Medicine & the Law
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to Medical students only.
Legal and bioethical principles and concepts in medicine. Topics include standard of care, informed consent, reproductive medicine, and end-of-life issues.
IMD 450B
Medicine & the Law
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to Medical students only.
Legal and bioethical principles and concepts in medicine. Topics include standard of care, informed consent, reproductive medicine, and end-of-life issues.
IMD 459
Oncology: Research & Treatment of Cancer
Second-, third-, or fourth-year medical student and/or consent of instructor.
Comprehensive review of current treatment practices of cancer and state-of-the-art research impacting treatment and prevention of cancer. Emphasis on epidemiology, molecular biology, and pharmacology.
IMD 460
Correctional Health Care Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year medical student in good academic standing.
Covers Correctional Health delivery and the effects of detention and incarceration on health status. Special emphasis on problems unique to health care delivery in a prison setting. Student will spend time in clinical settings at three prison facilities.
IMD 461
Mather VA Internal Medicine AI
Consent of Instructor.Limited enrollment.
Acting Internship in Internal Medicine for qualified 4th year Medical Students from the UC Davis School of Medicine at the Sacramento VA Hospital. Experiences will somewhat mirror those of AIs at UCDMC.
IMD 462
Medicine Wards AI
Consent of Instructor.  MDS 431; demonstrated ability to accept responsibility.Limited enrollment.
Assume role of acting intern and be primary physician on medical ward under direction of medical resident and staff. Teams I-V take call every fifth night. Emphasis on evidence-based inpatient care.
IMD 463
Acting Internship in Medicine Intensive Care Unit (MICU)
Completion of third-year in medical school; consent of Director of MICU.Limited enrollment.
At UCDMC, student functions as acting intern on MICU service under direction of medical resident and staff. Responsibility for patients admitted to MICU. On call in hospital every fourth night.
IMD 465
Medicos-Global Health Sciences
Consent of Instructor.  Medical students only.
Travel to foreign country for four weeks to collaborate with faculty from local universities and work in urban and rural environments, including hands-on experience with clinic patients. Cultural exchange and awareness of global health care. 
IMD 468
Ambulatory Internal Medicine Externship
IMD 430;  and Consent of Instructor.  Demonstrated ability to accept responsibility.Limited enrollment.
Hands-on primary care clinical experience in the ambulatory setting supervised by a general internist. Emphasis on evidence-based outpatient care.
IMD 470
Critical Evaluation of Landmark Studies in Evidence-Based Medicine
Fourth-year medical student.
Primary objective is to prepare future physicians to effectively integrate evidence-based medicine into their clinical practice. While this course has an Internal Medicine emphasis, the skills the course aims to impartformulating focused clinical questions, searching the medical literature, evaluating the quality of research, and integrating evidence into clinical practice, giving effective article presentations)apply to all future clinicians, regardless of their specialty.
IMD 480
Person Centered Assessment
Open to all medical students.
Person-centered assessment modalities and diagnostic approaches with regards to Internal Medicine and its different subspecialties.  
IMD 493
Palliative Care: Essentials in Communication, Pain & Symptom Management
Consent of Instructor.
Spend one week with the inpatient palliative care service, one week with the inpatient pain pharmacy service, and two weeks with Snowline Hospice.
IMD 494
Practicum in Community Health Clinics
Medical student with consent of instructor.
Students are assigned to clinical settings that demonstrate ethnic,urban/rural, or other related aspects of clinical community health. Through active participation in health care delivery, students are able to relate conceptual with practical aspects of primary health care. 
IMD 497
Medicine, Bioethics & the Holocaust
Consent of Instructor.  Medical students only.
Concept of "evil" and the role of collaborators, bystanders and participants exemplified by the holocaust and compared to problems physicians face in practice today. Demonstration that evil emerges incrementally until taken for granted.
IMD 498
Group Study in Internal Medicine
Consent of Instructor.
Special study for medical students which may involve laboratory or library research, ambulatory or inpatient care responsibility on campus, at UCDMC or off campus by specific arrangement.
IMM 201
Introductory Immunology
Graduate standing.Enrollment limited to 30 students.
Comprehensive introduction to the principles of immunology.  
IMM 204
Topics in Innate Immunity
IMM 201;  Or equivalent; IMM 293 preferred.Restricted to first- or second-year GGI and MGG students; others with permission of instructor; enrollment limited to 18 students.
Covers current topics in the field of innate immunity through student seminar presentations and critical evaluation of the literature. Concepts include: pathogen recognition, intercellular communication, specialized cellular function and effector/signaling molecules.
IMM 210
Topics on Neuroimmunology & Neuroinflammation
Consent of Instructor.
Topics will include a broad range of frontiers in neuroimmunology and neuroinflammation. Research articles in current literature will serve to guide in-depth discussions of experimental approaches, technical aspects of experimental techniques, data interpretation, and other relevant aspects of each topic.
IMM 291
Introduction to Critical Analysis of Immunology Research Literature
IMM 201 (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.
Introduction to critical reading of primary research papers in Immunology. Guided discussions on recent primary research papers provided to students before each class. 
IMM 292
Immunotoxicology Seminar
Graduate standing in Pharmacology/Toxicology, Immunology, Physiology, or Biochemistry.
Seminar presentations dealing with principles of xenobiotic effects on immune system functions and specific examples of drugs and environmental chemicals exerting toxic effects on the immune system.
IMM 293
Current Concepts in Immunology
PMI 126;  or Consent of Instructor.
Innate and acquired immunity as defense mechanisms against disease. Mechanisms regulating the distinct cell types driving these responses and current concepts in the literature.
IMM 294
Comparative Clinical Immunology
PMI 126;  or Consent of Instructor.
Clinical immunology in animals and man. Pathogenesis of representative infectious diseases, hypersensitive reactions, and autoimmunity. Emphasis on specific and nonspecific immune effector mechanisms to combat infections or mediate pathology.
IMM 295
Cytokines
IMM 293;  or Consent of Instructor.
Cytokines and their involvement in human and animal physiology/disease, molecular mechanisms and receptor signaling. Immune and non-immune actions. Overlapping/redundant functions (referred to as the "cytokine network").
IMM 296
Advanced Topics in Immunology
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Presentation and discussion of faculty research topics in Immunology 
IMM 297
Mucosal Immunology
IMM 201;  Or equivalent.
Basic concepts and current research topics in the field of mucosal immunology, with an emphasis on human immunology. Major emphases include innate and adaptive mucosal immunity, the gastrointestinal tract, the lung, lymphocyte trafficking, and mucosal vaccination. 
IRE 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

IRE 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

IRE 104
The Political Economy of International Migration
SOC 001, SOC 002, SOC 003, or SOC 004 recommended.
Analysis of worldwide migration patterns, and social scientific theories of international and transnational migration. Focus in economical, political, and social impact of immigration and potential for international and regional cooperation.
IRE 190
Topics in International Relations
Consent of Instructor.
Selected topics in international relations. Variable content.
IRE 192
International Relations Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Work experience in international relations, with term paper summarizing the practical experience of the student.
IRE 194HA
Special Study for Honors Students
Open only to majors of senior standing who qualify for Honors Program.
Directed reading, research, and writing on topics selected by students and instructor culminating in preparation of a senior honors thesis under direction of a faculty advisor.
IRE 194HB
Special Study for Honors Students
Open only to majors of senior standing who qualify for Honors Program.
Directed reading, research, and writing on topics selected by students and instructor culminating in preparation of a senior honors thesis under direction of a faculty advisor.
IRE 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.

IRE 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.

IST 090
Seminar
IST 009;  and Consent of Instructor.  And completion of 45 units with a minimum GPA of 3.250.Enrollment limited to sophomores who participated in the Integrated Studies Honors Program during their freshman year and transfer students by consent of instructor.
Interrelation between the arts and sciences, focusing on a special topic. 
IST 094
Introduction to Undergraduate Research
IST 009;  and Consent of Instructor.  And completion of 45 units with a minimum GPA of 3.500.Restricted to sophomores who participated in the Integrated Studies Honors Program during their freshman year and other students by consent of instructor.
The nature of research at the undergraduate level.
IST 190
Topics in Integrated Studies
IST 009;  and Consent of Instructor.
Discussion of the integration of the arts and sciences, focusing on a special topic.  
IST 194HA
Special Study for Honors Students
IST 009;  and Consent of Instructor.  And completion of 90 units with a minimum GPA of 3.500.
A program of research culminating in the writing of a junior honors thesis under the direction of a faculty advisor.
IST 194HB
Special Study for Honors Students 
IST 009;  and Consent of Instructor.  And completion of 90 units with a minimum GPA of 3.500.
A program of research culminating in the writing of a junior honors thesis under the direction of a faculty advisor.
IST 197T
Tutoring in Integrated Studies
Consent of Director of Integrated Studies.Open to students in the Integrated Studies Program only.
Tutoring in Integrated Studies  courses, usually in small discussion groups. Weekly discussions with the instructor on the subject matter of the course being tutored and on the art and craft of teaching.
ITA 002
Elementary Italian
ITA 001 or ITA 001S.
Continuation of ITA 001 or ITA 001S. Review of grammar and vocabulary, and practice of all language skills through cultural texts.
ITA 002S
Elementary Italian 
ITA 001 or ITA 001S.
Continuation of  ITA 001 or ITA 001S. Review of grammar and vocabulary, and practice of all language skills through cultural texts. May be taught abroad.
ITA 003
Elementary Italian
ITA 002 or ITA 002S.
Continuation of ITA 002 or ITA 002S. Review of grammar and vocabulary, and practice of all language skills through cultural texts.
ITA 003S
Elementary Italian
ITA 002 or ITA 002S.
Continuation of  ITA 002 or ITA 002S. Review of grammar and vocabulary, and practice of all language skills through cultural texts. May be taught abroad.
ITA 004
Intermediate Italian
ITA 003 or ITA 003S.
Review of grammar and syntax through written exercises and short prose works. Intended to develop the linguistic foundations of students who have completed the first year language classes.
ITA 004S
Intermediate Italian
ITA 003 or ITA 003S;  Or the equivalent.
Review of grammar and syntax through written exercises and readings of short prose works. Intended to develop the linguistic foundations of students who have completed the first year language classes. May be taught abroad.
ITA 005
Intermediate Italian
ITA 004 or ITA 004S.
Review and study of grammar and syntax, readings of short prose works, and written exercises. Intended to prepare students to read, understand, and discuss modern Italian.
ITA 005S
Intermediate Italian
ITA 004 or ITA 004S.
Review and study of grammar and syntax, readings of short prose works, and written exercises. Intended to prepare students to read, understand, and discuss modern Italian. May be taught abroad.
ITA 008A
Italian Conversation
ITA 003;  Or the equivalent.
Italian conversation with peers in classroom setting.
ITA 008AS
Italian Conversation
ITA 003;  Or the equivalent.
Italian conversation in local context outside United States. May be taught abroad.
ITA 008B
Italian Conversation
ITA 008A.
Italian conversation with peers in a classroom setting.
ITA 008BS
Italian Conversation
ITA 008A.
Italian conversation in local context outside United States. May be taught abroad.
ITA 009
Reading Italian
ITA 005 or ITA 005S.
Reading and discussion of modern Italian prose, including selections from creative, scientific and journalistic writings.  Introduction to contemporary Italian literature and culture. Strengthening the student's command of the Italian language.
ITA 009S
Reading Italian
ITA 005 or ITA 005S.
Reading and discussion of modern Italian prose, including selections from creative, scientific and journalistic writings. Introduction to contemporary Italian literature and culture as well as strengthening the student's command of the Italian language. May be taught abroad.
ITA 031
Beginning Italian for Spanish Speakers
SPA 003 or SPA 003V or SPA 003Y;  Or two years of high school Spanish or native or heritage speaker of Spanish.
Intensive introductory course on Italian language with emphasis on structural similarities between Italian and Spanish.
ITA 031Y
Beginning Italian for Spanish Speakers
SPA 003 or SPA 003V or SPA 003Y;  Consent of Instructor.  SPA 003 or two years of high school Spanish or native or heritage speaker of Spanish.
Intensive Introductory course on Italian language with emphasis on structural similarities between Italian and Spanish.
ITA 032
Beginning Italian for Spanish Speakers
ITA 031 or ITA 031Y;  or Consent of Instructor.
Continuation of ITA 031. Intensive introductory course to Italian language and grammar with emphasis on oral and written communication. Highlights the structural similarities between Italian and Spanish.
ITA 032Y
Beginning Italian for Spanish Speakers
ITA 031 or ITA 031Y;  or Consent of Instructor.
Continuation of ITA 031. Intensive introductory course to Italian language and grammar with emphasis on oral and written communication. Highlights the structural similarities between Italian and Spanish.
ITA 090X
Lower Division Seminar
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.
Examination of a special topic in Italian language or culture (such asItalian culture seen through film, Italian feminism, literature, or politics) through shared readings, discussions, written assignments, or special activities such as film screening or laboratory work.
ITA 098
Directed Group Study
and Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.
Primarily intended for lower division students.
ITA 101
Advanced Conversation, Composition & Grammar
ITA 009 or ITA 009S;  or Consent of Instructor.  Or the equivalent.
Instruction and practice in expository writing in Italian, with emphasis on advanced grammar, organization, and vocabulary building. 
ITA 101S
Advanced Conversation, Composition & Grammar
ITA 009 or ITA 009S;  Or the equivalent.
Instruction and practice in expository writing in Italian, with emphasis on advanced grammar, organization, and vocabulary building. May be taught abroad.
ITA 104
Italian Translation & Style
ITA 009 or ITA 009S;  Consent of Instructor.
Practice in translation from Italian to English and English to Italian, using literary and nonliterary texts of different styles. Analysis of linguistic problems and elements of style contained in the translation material.
ITA 104S
Italian Translation & Style
ITA 009 or ITA 009S.
Practice in translation from Italian to English and English to Italian, using literary and non-literary texts of different styles. Analysis of linguistic problems and elements of style contained in the translation material. May be taught abroad.
ITA 105
Introduction to Italian Literature
ITA 009 or ITA 009S;  Consent of Instructor.
Introduction to the study of the principal authors, works, and movements of the Medieval, Renaissance, and Early Modern periods in Italy.
ITA 112
Medieval & Renaissance Poetry: St. Francis to Petrarch
ITA 009 or ITA 009S;  Consent of Instructor.  Or the equivalent.
Study of the origins of Italian religious and secular poetry of the 13th and 14th centuries. Diversified poetry is illustrated in works of St. Francis, Dante, Cavalcanti, Petrarch, the Sicilian School, the Sweet New Style Poets, and other authors.
ITA 113
Dante Alighieri, Divina Commedia (Inferno, Purgatorio, Paradiso)
ITA 009 or ITA 009S;  Consent of Instructor.  Or equivalent.
Study of Dante Alighieri's Divina Commedia, and its role in the development of Italian language and literature. Emphasis will be placed on reading the whole poem within the historical context of the Middle Ages.
ITA 114
Boccaccio, Decameron, & the Renaissance Novella
ITA 009 or ITA 009S;  Consent of Instructor.  Or the equivalent course.
Study of the development of the short story in Italy, as exemplified in Giovanni Boccaccio's Decameron, in his predecessors and Renaissance followers.
ITA 115A
Studies in the Cinquecento
ITA 009 or ITA 009S;  or Consent of Instructor.  Or the equivalent.
Analysis of key texts from the high moment of the Italian Renaissance. The political and aesthetic legacy of humanism will be foregrounded in relation to authors such as Ficino, Ariosto, Machiavelli, Aretino, Castiglione, and Tasso.
ITA 115B
Italian Literature of the Renaissance & the Baroque: From Cellini to Marino
ITA 115A.
Continued examination into the loss of an ideal. Emphasis on the conflicts in Michelangelo and Tasso leading to Marino, with an excursus on Galileos role in the formation of a modern literary standard.
ITA 115C
Italian Drama from Machiavelli to the Enlightenment
ITA 009;  or Consent of Instructor.
Development of comic and tragic forms as critical representations of their societal and historical contexts, i.e. Machiavelli and the logic of power, Baroque dramatists in the service of counter-reformation Italy, Goldoni's comedies and bourgeois social consciousness.
ITA 115D
Early Modern Italian Lyric
ITA 009 or ITA 009S;  or Consent of Instructor.
Examination of the poetic tradition influenced by Petrarch. Consideration of the relation between gender and genre in such poets as Petrarch, Bembo, della Casa, Tasso, Marino, Gaspara Stampa, Veronica Franco, Isabella di Morra.
ITA 118
Italian Literature of the 18th Century
ITA 009 or ITA 009S;  or Consent of Instructor.
Development of modern Italian literature. Emphasis on the work of Goldoni, Bettinelli, Baretti, Parini, Alfieri, and Vico.
ITA 119
Italian Literature of the 19th Century
ITA 009 or ITA 009S;  or Consent of Instructor.
Romanticism in Italy, including Manzoni, Verga, and Verismo.
ITA 120A
Italian Literature of the 20th Century: The Novel
ITA 009;  Consent of Instructor.
Development of the novel from Svevo to the present. Emphasis on the work of Svevo, Levi, Moravia, Pavese, and Vittorini.
ITA 120B
Italian Literature of the 20th Century: Poetry & Drama
ITA 009;  or Consent of Instructor.
Italian poetry with emphasis on Hermeticism; the theater of Luigi Pirandello and its role in the development of contemporary Italian drama.
ITA 121
New Italian Cinema
FMS 001;  or Consent of Instructor.  And upper division standing.
Italian cinema of the 21st century in the context of profound cultural and social changes in Italy since World War II. Productions by representative directors such as Amelio, Giordana, Moretti, Muccino are included. Knowledge of Italian not required.
ITA 121S
New Italian Cinema
FMS 001;  and Consent of Instructor.  And upper division standing.
Italian cinema of the 21st century in the context of profound cultural and social changes in Italy since World War II. Productions by representative directors such as Amelio, Giordana, Moretti, Muccino are included. Knowledge of Italian not required. May be taught abroad.
ITA 128
Topics in Italian Culture
ITA 009 or ITA 009S;  or Consent of Instructor.
In-depth study of a particular topic in Italian Culture. Topics include: Italian Cities; Church and State; the "Southern Question"; Fascism and Resistance; 1968: Counter Culture, Feminism and Terrorism; Multicultural Italy.
ITA 131
Autobiography in Italy
ITA 009 or ITA 009S;  or Consent of Instructor.
Development of representations of selfhood with particular attention to generic conditions, the confessional tradition and the problem of women's self-representation. Authors studied may included Petrarch, Tasso, Casanova, Alfieri, Zvevok, Sibilla Aleramo and Primo Levi.
ITA 140
Italian Literature in English Translation: Dante, Divine Comedy
Any course from the GE Literature Preparation List.
Reading of Dante Alighieri's Divine Comedy, through the otherworld realms of Inferno, Purgatory, and Paradise.
ITA 141
Gender & Interpretation in the Renaissance
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Critical analysis of Renaissance texts with primary focus on issues such as human dignity, education and gender politics; "high" and "low" culture and its relation to literary practices.
ITA 142
Masterpieces of Modern Italian Narrative
ENG 003 or COM 002 or HIS 004C.
Analysis of major works of Italian narrative fiction from unification of Italy to present. Students will learn to use representative methods and concepts which guide literary scholarship. Consideration of works within European social and cultural context.
ITA 145
Special Topics in Italian Literature
ITA 009 or ITA 009S;  or Consent of Instructor.
Study of special topics and themes in Italian literature, such as comic literature, epic poetry, pre-20th-century theater, fascism, futurism, women and literature, and the image of America, etc.
ITA 145S
Special Topics in Italian Literature
ITA 009 or ITA 009S;  or Consent of Instructor.
Study of special topics and themes in Italian literature, such as comic literature, epic poetry, pre-20th-century theater, fascism, futurism, women and literature, the image of America, etc. May be taught abroad.
ITA 150
Studies in Italian Cinema
Consent of Instructor.
Introduction to Italian cinema through its genres. Focus on cinema as a reflection or a comment on modern Italian history. Film as an artistic medium and as a form of mass communication.
ITA 190X
Upper Division Seminar
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.Limited enrollment.
Examination of a special topic in Italian language or culture throughshared readings, discussions, written assignments or special activities such as film screening or laboratory work.
ITA 192
Italian Internship
Upper division standing and consent of chairperson of Italian Department.
Participation in government and business activities to gain work experience and to develop a better knowledge of Italian language andculture.
ITA 192S
Italian Internship
Upper division standing, consent of instructor and UC Davis program director or chairperson of Italian Department.
Participation in community service, teaching, government, and business activities to gain work experience and to develop a better knowledge of Italian language and culture. May be taught abroad in Italy.
ITA 194H
Special Study for Honors Students
Open only to majors of senior standing who qualify for Honors Program.
Guided research, under the direction of a faculty member, leading to a senior honors thesis on a topic in Italian literature, civilization, or language studies.
ITA 195H
Honors Thesis
ITA 194H.
Writing of an honors thesis on a topic in Italian literature, civilization, or language studies under the direction of a faculty member.
ITA 197T
Tutoring in Italian
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Tutoring in undergraduate courses, including leadership in small voluntary discussion groups affiliated with departmental courses.
ITA 197TC
Community Tutoring in Italian
Consent of Instructor.
Field experience as Italian tutors or teacher's aides.
ITA 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.
ITA 198S
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Group study on focused topics in Italian literature and culture. Varies according to instructor. May be taught abroad.
ITA 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

ITA 199S
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.
Opportunity for a faculty member to work with an advanced undergraduate student in a focused manner on a topic or topics of mutual research/creative interest. May be taught abroad.
ITA 297
Individual Study
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.

ITA 298
Group Study
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.

ITA 299
Research
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.

ITA 299D
Dissertation Research
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.

ITA 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

JPN 002
Elementary Japanese
JPN 001 C- or better;  Or the equivalent language proficiency.
Continuation of training in basic Japanese spoken and written skills.
JPN 003
Elementary Japanese
JPN 002 C- or better;  Or the equivalent language proficiency.
Continuation of training in basic spoken and written skills in Japanese language. May be taught abroad.
JPN 004
Intermediate Japanese
JPN 003 C- or better;  Or the equivalent language proficiency.
Intermediate-level training in spoken and written Japanese in cultural context, based on language skills developed in JPN 003.
JPN 005
Intermediate Japanese
JPN 004 C- or better;  Or the equivalent language proficiency.
Intermediate-level training in spoken and written Japanese in cultural context, based on language skills developed in JPN 004.
JPN 006
Intermediate Japanese
JPN 005 C- or better;  Or the equivalent language proficiency.
Intermediate-level training in spoken and written Japanese in cultural context, based on language skills developed in JPN 005. May be taught abroad.
JPN 007S
Intensive Intermediate Japanese
JPN 002 C- or better;  or the equivalent language proficiency. Consent of Instructor.
Special intensive course that combines the work of JPN 003, JPN 004, JPN 005, and JPN 006. Introduction to Japanese grammar and development of all language skills in a cultural context with emphasis on communication. Taught abroad in Japan.
JPN 025
Japanese Language & Culture (in English)
JPN 001 or LIN 001 or ANT 004 recommended.
Classification and communication of experience in Japanese culture; principles of language use in Japanese society. Speech levels and honorific language, language and gender, minority languages, literacy. Role of Japanese in artificial intelligence and computer science.
JPN 025
Japanese Language & Culture (in English)
JPN 001 or LIN 001 or ANT 004 recommended.
Classification and communication of experience in Japanese culture; principles of language use in Japanese society. Speech levels and honorific language, language and gender, minority languages, literacy. Role of Japanese in artificial intelligence and computer science.
JPN 031
Basic Kanji
JPN 001 C- or better;  or Consent of Instructor.  Or equivalent proficiency of basic writing system (Hiragana and Katakana).Restricted to students who have never been exposed to any form of Kanji or Chinese characters before; students who have completed schooling up to the 6th grade in the Japanese education system or equivalent or whose native languages have Chinese character orthography are not allowed to register this course.
Introduction and mastery of 300 basic Kanji or Chinese characters to establish a solid foundation in the novel and complex Kanji encountered while learning Japanese.
JPN 031
Basic Kanji
JPN 001 C- or better;  or Consent of Instructor.  Or equivalent proficiency of basic writing system (Hiragana and Katakana).Restricted to students who have never been exposed to any form of Kanji or Chinese characters before; students who have completed schooling up to the 6th grade in the Japanese education system or equivalent or whose native languages have Chinese character orthography are not allowed to register.
Introduction and mastery of 300 basic Kanji or Chinese characters to establish a solid foundation in the novel and complex Kanji encountered while learning Japanese.
JPN 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study.
JPN 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

JPN 111
Modern Japanese: Reading & Discussion
JPN 006 C- or better;  Or the equivalent language proficiency.
Readings in modern Japanese short stories, newspaper articles, and essays; conversation practice based on these readings.
JPN 112
Modern Japanese: Reading & Discussion
JPN 111 C- or better;  Or the equivalent language proficiency.
Continuation of JPN 111.
JPN 113
Modern Japanese: Reading & Discussion
JPN 112 C- or better;  Or the equivalent language proficiency.
Continuation of JPN 112. May be taught abroad.
JPN 114A
Spoken Japanese
Consent of Instructor.
Training in spoken Japanese for students with a basic working knowledge of the language. May be taught abroad.
JPN 114B
Spoken Japanese
JPN 114A C- or better;  or Consent of Instructor.  Or equivalent language proficiency.
Continuation of JPN 114A. Training in spoken Japanese for students with a basic working knowledge of the language. May be taught abroad.
JPN 114C
Spoken Japanese
JPN 114B C- or better;  or Consent of Instructor.  Or equivalent language proficiency.
Continuation of JPN 114B. Training in spoken Japanese for students with a basic working knowledge of the language. May be taught abroad.
JPN 115
Japanese Composition
JPN 006 C- or better;  or Consent of Instructor.
Development of skills in the techniques of writing Japanese. Practice in short essay writing with an aim toward mastery of the vocabulary and syntax of written style Japanese.
JPN 117S
Intensive Modern Japanese: Reading & Discussion
JPN 005 C- or better;  or Consent of Instructor.  Or the equivalent language proficiency.
Introduction to basic Japanese grammar and development of more advanced reading, writing, and conversation skills in a cultural context. Combination of JPN 006, JPN 111, JPN 112, JPN 113; intensively taught abroad in Japan.
JPN 121
Advanced Japanese I
JPN 113 C- or better;  or Consent of Instructor.
First of three courses in a series of fourth year Advanced Japanese which focuses on the levels of formality or politeness in conversation as well as socio-cultural aspects and topics in the Japanese society.
JPN 122
Advanced Japanese II
JPN 121 C- or better;  or Consent of Instructor.
Second of three courses in a series of fourth-year Advanced Japanese which focuses on the levels of formality or politeness in conversation as well as socio-cultural aspects and topics in the Japanese society.
JPN 123
Advanced Japanese III
JPN 122 C- or better;  or Consent of Instructor.
Third of three courses in a series of fourth-year Advanced Japanese which focuses on the levels of formality or politeness in conversation as well as socio-cultural aspects and topics in the Japanese society. 
JPN 130
Readings in Modern Japanese Literature to 1926
JPN 113;  or equivalent language proficiency, or consent of instructor.Restricted to completion of JPN 113 or equivalent as determined by taking a placement exam or consent of instructor.
Short stories and essays by Japanese writers of the Meiji and Taish eras, from 1868 to 1926. Authors include Natsume Sseki, Izumi Kyka, Tanizaki Jun'ichir and Akutagawa Rynosuke. Readings and discussion in Japanese with some emphasis on translation into English.
JPN 131
Readings in Modern Japanese Literature: 1920-1945
JPN 113;  or equivalent language proficiency, or consent of instructor.
Fourth-year level reading of representative works of modern Japanese literature including short stories, novellas, diaries, memoirs, poetry and excerpts from novels and plays from 1920 through the militaristic era, to the end of the war years in 1945.
JPN 132
Readings in Modern Japanese Literature: 1945-1970
JPN 113;  Or equivalent language proficiency, or consent of instructor.
Continuation of JPN 131, but may be taken independently. Covers selected texts from the immediate post-war years beginning in 1945 down to 1970 and the post-war recovery.
JPN 133
Readings in Modern Japanese Literature: 1970-Present
JPN 113;  or equivalent language proficiency, or consent of instructor.
Continuation of JPN 132, but may be taken independently. Covers selected texts from 1970 to the present.
JPN 134
Readings in the Humanities: Traditional Culture
JPN 113;  or equivalent language proficiency, or consent of instructor.
Fourth-year level reading of modern works by major specialists on traditional Japanese culture: history, religion, thought, art, international relations, and literary history and criticism. Focus is equally on developing reading skills and learning about Japanese culture.
JPN 135
Readings in the Humanities: The Modern Period
JPN 113;  or equivalent language proficiency, or consent of instructor.
Fourth-year level reading of authentic modern writings on Japanese culture, history, philosophy, society, religion, law, politics, international relations, aesthetics, and comparative culture by prominent critics, commentators, and scholars.
JPN 136
Readings in Newspapers & Magazines
JPN 113;  or equivalent language proficiency, or consent of instructor.
Fourth-year level reading of newspaper and magazine reports, articles, and editorials on domestic and international affairs relating to contemporary Japan.
JPN 137
Readings in Contemporary Japanese Literature
JPN 113;  or equivalent language proficiency, or consent of instructor.
Readings of short stories and essays by contemporary writers. Representative writers include Yoshimoto Banana, Otsuichi, Suzuki Koji, Kyogoku Natsuhiko, Ogawa Yoko, and Murakami Haruki. Readings and discussion in Japanese with some emphasis on translation into English.
JPN 138
Readings in the Humanities:  Japan Today
JPN 113;  or equivalent language proficiency, or consent of instructor.Restricted to completion of JPN 113 or equivalent as determined by taking a placement exam or consent of instructor.
Topical essays focused on contemporary Japan. Themes center on defining Japan today in terms of its future and past such as through its urban society, trends in architecture, "soft power" industries, and "traditional" elements as mainstays of Japan's cultural currency.
JPN 141
Introduction to Classical Japanese
JPN 113;  Or the equivalent language proficiency.
Basic features of classical Japanese grammar through careful reading of selected literary texts such as Hojoki or Tsurezuregusa.
JPN 151
Japanese Linguistics
JPN 003;  Or equivalent language proficiency.
Introduction to Japanese linguistics, featuring key aspects of the Japanese language. Analysis of Japanese from the perspectives of phonology, syntax, discourse analysis, sociolinguistics and psycholinguistics. 
JPN 192
Japanese Internship
Consent of Instructor.
Work experience in Japanese language, with analytical term paper on a topic approved by instructor.
JPN 194H
Special Thesis Honors Project
Consent of Instructor.  Senior standing and qualification for the Japanese Senior Thesis Project.
Guided research, under the direction of a senate faculty member, leading to a senior thesis project on a topic in Japanese literature, culture, linguistics, or language studies.
JPN 197T
Tutoring in Japanese
Consent of Department Chairperson.
Leading of small voluntary discussion groups affiliated with one of the Program's regular courses. 
JPN 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study.
JPN 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

JPN 291
Seminar in Modern Japanese Literature: Major Writers
JPN 130 or JPN 131 or JPN 132 or JPN 133 or JPN 134 or JPN 135 or JPN 136 or JPN 137 or JPN 138;  Or the equivalent language proficiency.
In-depth reading and critical analyses of major works by and critical literature on one or two prominent modern or contemporary writers such as Natsume Soseki, Mori Ogai, Shimazaki Toson, Akutagawa Ryunosuke, Tanizaki Junichiro, Abe Kobo and Oe Kenzaburo.
JPN 297
Directed Independent Study
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to graduate students.
Directed independent study on a topic culminating in a term paper. Independent Studies may only be arranged with consent of the instructor and when graduate seminars are unavailable. 
JPN 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.
 
JST 101
Topics in Jewish Thought
JST 010 or RST 023;  or Consent of Instructor.
Selected themes in Jewish thought in historical and social perspective. Traces the historical development of topics in Jewish thought such as Messianism, or focuses on one specific historical period, such as modern Jewish thought.
JST 110
Selected Topics in Jewish Literature
One lower division literature or Jewish Studies (JST) course or consent of instructor.
Literature written about the Jewish experience, treated in its historical and social context.  Examines literature written in one language, such as English, Hebrew, or Yiddish, or a theme, such as gender or modern identities, as expressed in different literary traditions.
JST 111
Israeli Writing Since 1960
One course in American or European literature.
Contemporary Hebrew literature, in translation, in relation to post-independence debates about religious, social, and political identity of the Jewish state; literary reflections of Israeli ethnic diversity and changing gender relations; modern Hebrew poetry and postmodern experiments in fiction.
JST 112
Readings in Jewish Writing & Thought in German Culture
RST 023;  or Consent of Instructor.
Historical tradition of Jewish thought in the German cultural context; unique contributions of Jewish writers to culture of the German speaking world; what it means to be "other" in the mainstream culture.
JST 116
Readings in Jewish Writing & Thought in German Culture
RST 023;  or Consent of Instructor.
Historical tradition of Jewish thought in the German cultural context; unique contributions of Jewish writers to culture of the German speaking world; what it means to be "other" in the mainstream culture.
JST 120
Cinema & the American Jewish Experience
JST 010 recommended.
Examination of American cinema to reveal how Jewish identity is expressed and submerged, tracing the relations between religion, identity, race, politics, and art.
LAT 002
Elementary Latin
LAT 001;  Or equivalent.
Continuation of LAT 001.
LAT 003
Intermediate Latin
LAT 002;  Or equivalent.
Continuation of LAT 002. Selected readings from Latin authors.
LAT 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

LAT 100
Readings in Latin Prose
LAT 003;  Or equivalent.
Review of Latin morphology, grammar, and vocabulary. Readings in prose authors, including Julius Caesar.
LAT 101
Livy
LAT 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Livy
LAT 102
Roman Comedy
LAT 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Roman comedy.
LAT 103
Vergil: Aeneid
LAT 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Vergil: Aeneid.
LAT 104
Sallust
LAT 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Sallust.
LAT 105
Catullus
LAT 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Catullus.
LAT 106
Horace: Odes & Epodes
LAT 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Horace: Odes & Epodes.
LAT 108
Horace: Satires & Epistles
LAT 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Horace: Satires & Epistles.
LAT 109
Roman Elegy
LAT 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Roman elegy.
LAT 110
Ovid
LAT 100;  Or equivalent.
Translation and discussion of selected readings from the works of Ovid.
LAT 112
Cicero
LAT 100;  Or equivalent.
Translation and discussion of selected readings from the works of Cicero.
LAT 115
Lucretius
LAT 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Lucretius.
LAT 116
Vergil: Eclogues & Georgics
LAT 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Vergil: Eclogues & Georgics.
LAT 118
Roman Historians
LAT 100;  Or equivalent.
Readings in Latin from one or more of the major Roman historians and biographers. Authors may include Sallust, Nepos, Livy, Tacitus, Suetonius, and Ammianus Marcellinus.
LAT 119
Readings in Republican Latin Literature
LAT 100;  Or equivalent.
Translation and discussion of selected readings from Republican Latin literature.
LAT 120
Readings in Imperial Latin Literature
LAT 100;  Or equivalent.
Readings in Imperial Latin literature.
LAT 121
Latin Prose Composition
LAT 100;  Or equivalent.
Intensive grammar and vocabulary review through exercises in Latin prose composition.
LAT 122
Early Christian Writers 
LAT 100 (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.
Latin style of selected early Christian writers. Topics may include: Latin translations of Greek and Hebrew scriptures, Christian Latin, with focus on North Africa, Palestine, or Spain; High literary Christian Latin; Christian Latin oratorical style.
LAT 125
Medieval Latin
LAT 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Selected readings from the Vulgate and various medieval authors provide an introduction to the developments in the Latin Language and literature from the 4th to the 15th centuries.
LAT 130
Readings in Late Latin
LAT 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Translation and discussion of selected readings from late imperial-early medieval Christian and pagan literature.
LAT 135
Themes in Latin Literature
LAT 100 (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.
Readings in Latin that trace a theme across times, genres, and authors. 
LAT 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study.
LAT 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.
Special study for advanced undergraduates.
LAW 200D
American Legal Concepts I (LL.M.)
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to LL.M. students.
Designed to provide basic skills necessary to succeed in both law school and legal practice.
LAW 201
Property
AAS 010;  LAW 200A;  or Consent of Instructor.  text here.
Study of doctrines and concepts of property law with primary emphasis on real property. Coverage includes: the estates in land system; the landlord-tenant relationship, conveyancing, and private and public land use control.
LAW 207C
California Civil Procedure Research
LAW 207;  LAW 208.
Includes lectures and in-class exercises working with print, and electronic, legal research materials to prepare responses to various fact patterns. Extensive use of real-world case scenarios to mimic conditions likely encountered by legal practitioners. Half of the course time is lecture; half is in-class practical assignments or discussion designed to enhance the students understanding of the concepts introduced.
LAW 207D
Intellectual Property Research
LAW 207;  LAW 208.
Includes lectures and in-class exercises working with print, and electronic, legal research materials to prepare responses to various fact patterns. Extensive use of real-world case scenarios to mimic conditions likely encountered by legal practitioners working in the intellectual property legal practice.
LAW 208E
Introduction to U.S. Legal Methods A
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to LL.M. students.
Designed to provide foreign students with background skills at a more basic level than U.S. Legal Methods A and B. Audit carefully selected courses in the regular curriculum and complete assignments related to those courses.
LAW 208F
Introduction to U.S. Legal Methods B (LLM) 
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to LL.M. students.
Designed to provide foreign students with background skills at a more basic level than U.S. Legal Methods A and B. Audit carefully selected courses in the regular curriculum and complete assignments related to those courses.
LAW 209A
Patent Law
LAW 274;  or Consent of Instructor.
Covers all essential aspects of patent law: patentable subject matter, novelty, utility, nonobviousness, enablement, prosecution, infringement, and remedies.
LAW 209T
Innovation & Technology Transfer Seminar
LAW 209A or LAW 274, recommended but not required.Restricted to 15 students.
From biomedicine to cleantech, public institutions are playing leading roles in developing cutting-edge technologies. Explores the law and policy of publicly-supported innovation and technology transfer.
LAW 210A
Privatization of Criminal Justice Seminar 
Prior social theory or ciminal procedure knowledge not required; completion of LAW 227A strongly recommended.Restricted to 10 students.
Analyze the legal, historical, and sociological aspects of the growing private sector provision of criminal justice services traditionally assumed by government, including prisons, policing, and adjudication.
LAW 210H
Aoki Federal Court Amicus Project
LAW 203; LAW 219; both required or consent of instructor.
Work on actual federal criminal cases in the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals and United States Supreme Court. File briefs amicus curiae on critical issues, and develop research, writing, and oral advocacy skills.
LAW 210H
Aoki Federal Court Amicus Project
LAW 219;  LAW 227A;  both required or consent of instructor.
Work on actual federal criminal cases in the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals and United States Supreme Court. File briefs amicus curiae on critical issues, and develop research, writing, and oral advocacy skills.
LAW 210J
Best Practices for Justice Seminar: Advocates Working to  Improve the Criminal Justice System
LAW 206;  LAW 227A (can be concurrent).
The Criminal Justice System continues to evolve as perceptions regarding judges, police officers and criminal attorneys change. Analyzes how our sense of justice is formed and what it looks like in the actual practice of criminal law.
LAW 211A
Advanced Negotiations Strategy & Client Counseling
Consent of Instructor.Application course; must apply and secure professor approval to enroll; will involve participating in discussions and a series of simulations; your classmates will be counting on you to actively participate and be well prepared for every simulation; do not apply to take this course unless you are willing and able to participate fully and can accept constructive feedback; if you anticipate missing more than two class sessions, do not apply to take this course.  
Understand the dynamics of interviewing and counseling process. Designed to be relevant to a broad spectrum of negotiation problems that are faced by legal professionals.
LAW 211B
International Business Negotiations
LAW 215 (can be concurrent);  Prerequisites: Prior or concurrent enrollment in Business Associations (LAW 215) required; prior enrollment in Negotiations (LAW 211) and/or International Business Transactions (LAW 270) preferred.
Structured around a simulated negotiation exercise with students from a similar class at Stanford Law School. Experience the development of a business transaction over an extended negotiation in a context that replicates actual legal practice. 
LAW 213A
Transnational Criminal Law
LAW 205;  LAW 206.
Examines the laws responses to a particular aspect of globalization, transnational crime. Explore the phenomenon of transnationality and how it affects the power of nation-states, acting alone or together, to prosecute certain crimes.  
LAW 214
Tax Issues Related to Estate Planning
LAW 221 recommended.
Tax issues Related to estate planning.
LAW 215A
The Law of Corporate Governance Seminar
LAW 215.
Advanced issues in the governance of publicly held corporations. Separation of ownership and control and how the law has addressed this issue at the theoretical level and in the context of topics such as the duties of corporate directors, shareholder voting rights, and competition among states to attract corporate charters. 
LAW 219A
Advanced Evidence
LAW 219.Limited to six students; selected by professor. Interested students complete an application form; available in the Law Registrar's Office. Credit is contingent on attending all classes and participating in all exercises. Participation is crucial to the success of the course, as students will be working in teams of three. Do not take this course unless you are willing and able to participate fully and can accept criticism. 
Public interest lawyers often spend much time in the courtroom. Prosecution, defender, and legal aid offices usually don't have resources to train lawyers in trial work. Seeks to help remedy this deficiency by helping develop witness interrogation skills.  
LAW 228
Startups & Venture Capital
LAW 215;  must be completed, prerequisite will not be waived.Limited enrollment.
Introduction to the various legal and business considerations involved in forming and operating an emerging growth business.
LAW 228
Startups & Venture Capital
LAW 215;  must be completed, prerequisite will not be waived.Limited enrollment.
Introduction to the various legal and business considerations involved in forming and operating an emerging growth business.
LAW 228A
Mergers & Acquisitions
LAW 215.
Practical approach to mergers and acquisitions, with an in-depth look at the planning, negotiation, documentation and completion of mergers and acquisitions.  
LAW 229
Scientific Evidence
LAW 219.Limited enrollment.
In addition to examining the evidence law governing the admission of scientific testimony, considers trial advocacy in presenting and attacking such testimony.
LAW 230
International Environmental Law 
Prior course work in environmental law and/or international law is helpful.
Elective Course for Environmental Law Certificate Program. May satisfy Advanced Writing Requirement with professor's permission. Provides an overview of the structure and basic principles of international environmental law and policy. 
LAW 236
Securities Regulations
LAW 215.
Regulation of the distribution of securities under the Securities Act of 1933 and SEC Rules adopted there under, registration and reporting provisions of the 1934 Securities Exchange Act.
LAW 236A
Securities Regulation I
LAW 215;  or Consent of Instructor.
Legal rules and concepts applicable to business associations, both public and closely held. Corporate form of organization, partnerships and other associational forms. 
LAW 236B
Securities Regulation II
LAW 215;  or Consent of Instructor.  LAW 236A recommended.
Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and the regulation of securities markets. Topics covered include regulation of securities markets and securities professionals, responsibilities of securities lawyers, continuous reporting, transnational securities fraud, and enforcement of the securities acts.
LAW 245A
Corporate Responsibility: Case Studies in (Un)Ethical Leadership
LAW 215 (can be concurrent).
Explores corporate responsibility and leadership through case studies of contemporary scandals. Reviews business forms and the consequences of an institution failing to comply with legal & ethical duties to employees, shareholders, and the public.
LAW 246
Federal Jurisdiction
LAW 205.
Study of subject-matter jurisdiction of federal courts. 
LAW 246A
California Civil Procedure: A Practical Approach
LAW 203.
Provides a practical, hands-on approach to California Civil Procedure through case studies, drafting of common litigation documents, and studying the application of the Code of Civil Procedure to practical case scenarios. Issues of general civil litigation emphasizing bar exam topics are included.
LAW 247
Taxation of Partnerships & LLCs
LAW 220.
Study of the federal income tax treatment of partnerships and partners; including entities classified as partnerships.
LAW 247A
International Aspects of U. S. Taxation
LAW 220 (can be concurrent);  Completion or current enrollment in a course covering the domestic taxation of corporations is suggested but not required; Corporate Tax can be concurrent.
Examine the U.S. income tax laws and policies related to the taxation of foreign income of U.S. persons and U.S. income of foreign persons. 
LAW 248CA
United Nations Human Rights Practicum I
Consent of Instructor.
Opportunity to work in support of the mandate of the United Nations Special Rapporteur in the field of cultural rights.
LAW 248CB
United Nations Human Rights Practicum II
Consent of Instructor.
Build on the knowledge of the workings of the United Nations human rights system they gained in Practicum I, and gain further advanced experience working with UN documents, with individual cases in the field and with thematic reports.
LAW 248G
Legal Spanish for U.S. Lawyers
Must satisfy one of the following: undergraduate degree in Spanish; a minor in Spanish with experience living in a Spanish-speaking country; grew up in a Spanish-speaking household and achieved proficiency; able to pass an informal assessment by the instructor.
Designed for law students who are native Spanish-speakers or who have achieved proficiency in Spanish through study or experiences in a Spanish-speaking country.  
LAW 251TB
Labor Law II
LAW 251T preferred; not required.
Survey of the legislative, administrative, and judicial regulation of labor relations under federal law. 
LAW 259P
Women & the Law Practicum 
LAW 259 (can be concurrent).
Complements the content of the feminist legal theory course by providing the opportunity to consider how feminist theory may be used to inform law-making.
LAW 263A
Trial Practice
LAW 219 (can be concurrent).Limited enrollment.
Introduction to the preparation and trial of cases, featuring lectures, videotapes, demonstrations, assigned readings and forensic drills. Laboratory held on Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday evening.
LAW 263B
Advanced Trial Practice
LAW 219;  LAW 263A.Class limited to 40 students.
Train on the organization and presentation of a complex trial, including pretrial preparation, jury selection, strategy considerations, evidentiary issues, and effective handling of plaintiff and defense cases through verdict.
LAW 265
Natural Resources Law Seminar
LAW 285 or LAW 256 recommended, but not required.Restricted to 15 students. 
In-depth coverage of two foundational principles of natural resources law: public trust doctrine and private property rights protected under the Takings Clause of the U.S. and many state constitutions. 
LAW 266
Commercial Law
LAW 202.
Survey of commercial transactions law under the Uniform Commercial Code (UCC). Covers a number of topics under Articles 2, 3, & 9 of the UCC. Topics include attachment and perfection of security interests in personal property and general principles of negotiability. Primary goals are to provide a foundational knowledge and understanding of several articles of the UCC and improve problem-solving skills in this area.
LAW 269
Basic Finance for Lawyers
Students with a non-law basic finance course will not be admitted, except with consent of instructor.
Basic techniques of analysis that are part of the core curriculum in a good business school. Gives background necessary for understanding and advising your clients and for understanding other business-related law school courses.
LAW 269
Basic Finance for Lawyers
Students with a non-law basic finance course will not be admitted, except with consent of instructor.
Basic techniques of analysis that are part of the core curriculum in a good business school. Gives background necessary for understanding and advising your clients and for understanding other business-related law school courses.
LAW 269C
Corporate Finance
LAW 215 or concurrent enrollment recommended.
Focus on how corporations raise money, stocks and bonds, etc.; how deals are structured and why corporations use one strategy instead of another.  
LAW 270A
Life-Cycle Transactions & Drafting
Business Associations and/or Trusts, Wills & Estates are recommended for enhanced comprehension.
Focuses on analysis of contract drafting design for various types of transactions and actual transactional documents typically encountered.
LAW 271
Nonprofit Organizations & Drafting
LAW 215;  or Consent of Instructor.Restricted to 13 students.
Learn special legal rules and concepts applicable to non-profit organizations; particularly IRC 501(c)(3) nonprofits. Combination skills class and lecture class.
LAW 271A
NonProfit Organizations: State & Local Governance Issues
LAW 215 (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.
Focuses on the state and local laws applicable to nonprofit organizations; i.e., public interest, cultural, religious, educational and other not-for-profit entities.
LAW 271B
Nonprofit Organizations: Tax Exemptions & Taxation Focus
LAW 215;  or Consent of Instructor.  LAW 220 recommended.
Focuses on the conceptual basis and substantive law criteria for the federal and state income tax exemption of nonprofit organizations. 
LAW 275TA
Intellectual Property Agreement Drafting for Biotech & Pharma
Upper division Business Law course or Intellectual Property course; priority given to students that have completed LAW 274.
Covers the negotiation and drafting of intellectual property agreements common in the biotechnology and pharmaceutical arena.
LAW 279
Legal Analysis
Consent of Instructor.Limited enrollment; for 2Ls only.
Focuses on skills critical to law school success, and ultimately, bar exam success.
LAW 280
Advanced Legal Writing: Analytical & Persuasive Writing
Consent of Instructor.
Develop essay writing skills and performance test drafting typically employed on the bar examination.  
LAW 280B
Problem Solving & Analysis
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to third-year Law students only.
Skills focused on the development of legal analytical and organizational methods essential to successful completion of the Performance Test component of the California Bar Exam (and other states), and, by extension, to success in the practice of law.
LAW 285B
Environmental Practice
LAW 285 recommended.
Examines underlying theory and practice in securing compliance with our major environmental laws.  
LAW 285B
Environmental Practice
LAW 285 recommended.
Examines underlying theory and practice in securing compliance with our major environmental laws.  
LAW 288
Advanced Constitutional Law Seminar
LAW 218 (can be concurrent) or LAW 218A (can be concurrent).Limited enrollment.
Seminar explores in-depth selected topics or problems in constitutional law and theory. The current focus will include diverse topics including abortion rights, the development of Second Amendment jurisprudence, and other subject areas. 
LAW 288C
National Security Law
LAW 205.
Examines the allocation of national security powers among the three branches of government, and the laws & policies that govern military operations, the collection & use of intelligence, homeland security, and other current national security issues.
LAW 290C
Information Privacy Law
Criminal Procedure strongly recommended.
Examine several topics that arise in field of information privacy law, with a special emphasis on law enforcement access to this information.
LAW 292A
Advanced Topics in Immigration & Citizenship Law Seminar
LAW 292;  May be waived by the professor.
Conducts a closer examination of various topics and subject matters that relate to immigration and citizenship law.
LAW 293B
Representing Spanish-Speaking Clients: Language, Culture, & Emotional Intelligence
Spanish proficiency or Consent of Instructor.
Goal is to prepare future attorneys to effectively represent Spanish-speaking clients through various key tools, including litigation tools, language, culture, and emotional intelligence.
LAW 293T
Public Interest Lawyering, Civil Rights & Employment Law
LAW 260;  LAW 260AT.
Advanced course covers employment law issues through the lens of public interest lawyers and their constituencies.  
LAW 295A
Trademark & Unfair Competition Law
LAW 274 recommended, not required.
Intensive look at selected issues in Trademark Law, including the concepts of trademarks and unfair competition, acquisition and loss of trademark rights, infringement, trademarks as speech, and international aspects of trademark protection.
LAW 295A
Trademark & Unfair Competition Law
LAW 274 recommended, not required.
Intensive look at selected issues in Trademark Law, including the concepts of trademarks and unfair competition, acquisition and loss of trademark rights, infringement, trademarks as speech, and international aspects of trademark protection.
LAW 411D
Immigration & Nationality Law Review
Consent of Instructor.
The Immigration & Nationality Law Review (INLR) is in part a reprint journal and serves as an anthology of seminal articles in immigration, nationality, and citizenship law. INLR has republished a number of articles authored by King Hall faculty. INLR also creates space for student Notes. The INLR also hosts a symposium or other immigration-related project each year and publishes materials from that enterprise in the years volume. 
LAW 413
Interschool Competition
Consent of appropriate faculty advisor.Limited to students actually representing the School in the interschool competitions.
Participation in interschool moot court and lawyering skills competitions. Competition must be authorized by the appropriate faculty advisor. Faculty advisor may condition the award of academic credit for any particular competition on the performance of such additional work as may be reasonable to justify the credit. May satisfy advanced legal writing requirement
LAW 414
Moot Court Board
LAW 410A;  LAW 410B.Limited enrollment.
Members of Moot Court Board may receive 1 unit for each semester of service on the board; maximum of 2 units. Credit awarded only after certification by Moot Court Board and approval of the faculty advisors to Moot Court Board.
LAW 414A
Negotiations Board
Consent of Instructor.
Members of the King Hall Negotiations Board assist in the administration of the King Hall Negotiation Team by performing a variety of tasks under the supervision of the course instructor. 
LAW 417A
Law Review Editor
Consent of Instructor.
Editors must have completed an editorship article and must perform editorial duties (a substantial time commitment). Credit is awarded only after completion of both semesters.
LAW 417B
Law Review Editor
Consent of Instructor.
Editors must have completed an editorship article and must perform editorial duties (a substantial time commitment). Credit is awarded only after completion of both semesters.
LAW 420
Civil Rights Clinic
LAW 219 (can be concurrent);  and Consent of Instructor.  Priority given to students enrolled in or have taken LAW 267.Limited enrollment.
Clinic provides practical experience in providing legal services to indigent clients who have filed civil rights actions in state and federal trial and appellate courts. Students work on clinic cases under the supervision of the clinic director.
LAW 425
Judicial Clinical
LAW 261;  Required for full-time clinical students and recommended for part-time clinical students.
Students may arrange judicial clerkship clinical programs with anapproved list of state and federal judges through the Clinical office and under the sponsorship of the faculty member in charge. All students must complete weekly time records and bi-weekly journals.
LAW 430
Federal & State Taxation Externship
LAW 220;  and Consent of Instructor.
Opportunity to work with the Internal Revenue Service or other governmental tax agency. Journals and attendance at group meetings required.
LAW 435
Family Protection Clinic
LAW 219 (can be concurrent);  FullYear Clinic: prior or concurrent enrollment in LAW 219 to qualify for state court certification; prior or concurrent enrollment in LAW 272 and LAW 263A recommended, not required; One-Semester Clinic: prior or concurrent enrollment in LAW 272 and LAW 263A recommended, not required.FullYear Clinic: each student required to enroll for two semesters, receiving 4 units each semester for total of 8 units; class limited to seven students; One-Semester Clinic: each student required to meet weekly for a 2-hour seminar; class limited to four students. 
Represent low-income persons in family law and related matters arising out of situations involving family violence. 
LAW 435A
Family Protection Clinic
LAW 219 (can be concurrent);  Consent of Instructor.  Full-Year Clinic: LAW 219 is required to qualify for state court certification; prior or concurrent enrollment in LAW 272 and LAW 263A recommended not required.  One-Semester Clinic: prior or concurrent enrollment in LAW 272 and LAW 263A recommended not required.FullYear Clinic: each student required to enroll for two semesters receiving 4 units each semester for total of 8 units; class limited to seven students.
Represent low-income persons in family law and related matters arising out of situations involving family violence.
LAW 435B
Family Protection Clinic
LAW 219 (can be concurrent);  and Consent of Instructor.  Full-Year Clinic: LAW 219  is required to qualify for state court certification; prior or concurrent enrollment in LAW 272 and LAW 263A recommended not required.FullYear Clinic: each student required to enroll for two semesters receiving 4 units each semester for total of 8 units; class limited to seven students.
Represent low-income persons in family law and related matters arising out of situations involving family violence.
LAW 440A
Immigration Law Clinic
LAW 292 (can be concurrent).Each student is required to enroll for two semesters, receiving 4 units each semester for total of 8 units. 
Provides legal representation to indigent non-citizens in removal proceedings before U.S. Immigration Courts, the Board of Immigration Appeals, and federal courts, including the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals. 
LAW 440B
Immigration Law Clinic 
LAW 292 (can be concurrent);  Consent of Instructor.Each student is required to enroll for two semesters, receiving 4 units each semester for total of 8 units. 
Provides legal representation to indigent non-citizens in removal proceedings before U.S. Immigration Courts, the Board of Immigration Appeals, and federal courts, including the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals. 
LAW 445
Legislative Process Externship
LAW 240 (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.
Practical experience in the operation of the office of a legislator or a legislative committee. The major thrust of the program is to enable students to become familiar with the give and take realities of making laws, as contracted with
LAW 445A
Aoki Water Justice Clinic
Consent of Instructor.
Aoki Water Justice Clinic trains students to use community lawyering and transactional legal tools to ensure that low-income, California communities receive safe, clean, and affordable drinking water.
LAW 450
Environmental Law Externship
LAW 285;  or Consent of Instructor.
Practical experience in environmental law. Students will work in an approved government, non-profit or private law office engaged in some form of environmental law work for a minimum of eight hours per week. Students must prepare a journal describing and reflecting upon their clinical experience, and meet periodically with the instructor.
LAW 455
Employment Relations Externship
LAW 251 or LAW 260 (can be concurrent).
Practical experience in employment relations, including employment discrimination and public sector labor law. Work under the direct supervision of a government lawyer. Opportunity to participate in a range of with emphasis on observation and participation in actual investigation, interviewing, drafting pleading, and attendance at hearings.
LAW 460
Public Interest Law Externship 
Prior or concurrent enrollment in LAW 293 recommended.
Opportunity to work with a public interest practitioner in a nonprofit organization. Journals and attendance at two group meetings required. Students must complete an evaluative final paper of approximately eight pages. Hours completed in public interest setting may be applied toward the practicum requirement for the Public interest Law Program.
LAW 465
Intellectual Property Externship 
LAW 293 and Comparative Public Services recommended.
Opportunity to work for government, academic, and nonprofit entities. 
LAW 470
Administration of Criminal Justice Externship
LAW 219 (can be concurrent);  LAW 227 (can be concurrent); completion of or concurrent enrollment in LAW 219 and LAW 227; LAW 263A recommended.Limited enrollment.
Gain practical experience working full or part time in a District Attorneys or Public Defenders office in one of several surrounding counties or in a federal Public Defender or U.S. Attorneys office. Participate in the many activities associated with the office for which they extern: observation, interviewing, research, counseling, motion practice, and trials under State Bar rules.
LAW 480
Clinical Program in Prison Law
Consent of Instructor.
Provides practical experience in providing legal services to real clients who have various problems related to their incarceration in state prison. The services require analysis and application of Constitutional Law, state statutory law, agency regulations, and the rules of professional responsibility. 
LAW 495
Instruction in Legal Research & Writing Skills
Consent of Instructor.
Participants assist in instructing the Legal Research and Writing programs for first-year students under the direction of the Legal Research and Writing instructors.
LAW 495LS
Lawyering Skills Teaching Assistant
Consent of Instructor.
Assist the faculty in Lawyering Skills course for first-year students. Approval of the Lawyering Skills instructor is required for enrollment. Grading is on a satisfactory/unsatisfactory basis.
LAW 498
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.Limited to no fewer than 4 or more than 10 students.
Groups of students with common interest in studying a stated legal problem may plan and conduct their own research and seminar program under the direction of faculty. 
LAW 498A
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Groups of students with common interest in studying a stated legal problem may plan and conduct their own research and seminar program under the direction of faculty. 
LDA 021
Landscape Representation I
LDA 001 (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.Pass One restricted to Pre-Landscape Architecture and Sustainable Environmental Design majors. 
Introduction to landscape architectural representation techniques. Fundamentals of orthographic drafting, freehand drawing, photography, and basic digital representation.
LDA 023
Landscape Representation II
LDA 021;  or Consent of Instructor.Restricted to Pre-Landscape Architecture and Landscape Architecture majors only.
Instruction of methods to explore and communicate landscape design intentions through digital media
LDA 050
Site Ecology
BIS 002B.Pass One restricted to Pre-Landscape Architecture and Sustainable Environmental Design majors. 
Introduction to ecological concepts, including nutrient dynamics, population regulation, community structure, ecosystem function. Principles will be applied to human activities such as biological conservation, ecological restoration, landscape planning, and management. Weekly lab devoted to field exercises in local ecosystems. 
LDA 060
Landform & Grading Studio
LDA 070.Pass One restricted to Pre-Landscape Architecture majors. 
Introduction of landform and topography as landscape medium and utilization of grading and drainage to design meaningful and functional spaces. Intro to site analysis and site planning, with specific attention to topography.
LDA 070
Introduction to Spacemaking
LDA 021;  or Consent of Instructor.Pass One restricted to Pre-Landscape Architecture and Sustainable Environmental Design majors.
Introduction to basic principles of design towards the creation of space. Design methodologies and skills to define, manipulate, and represent the built environment. Workshops in 3D physical modeling for spacemaking.
LDA 098
Directed Group Study in Landscape Architecture
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study.
LDA 099
Special Study for Undergraduates in Landscape Architecture
Consent of Instructor.

LDA 101
Advanced Theory in Environmental Design
LDA 070 (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.Open to Landscape Architecture and Sustainable Environmental Design majors only.
Provides exploration of contemporary theories and philosophies impacting design of landscapes and the built environment. Includes exploring competing definitions of "landscape," "nature," and "culture."
LDA 102
Methods in Design & Landscape Research
LDA 171;  or Consent of Instructor.Open to Landscape Architecture majors only. 
Research, design, and planning methods employed in landscape architecture. Exercises allow students to design independent landscape research. Lectures provide a historical overview of research methodology. 
LDA 120
Landscape Representation III
LDA 023;  or Consent of Instructor.Restricted to Landscape Architecture majors. 
Provides hands-on workshop environment to explore advanced representation and modeling skills.  Digital drawing explored as an analytical research method and generative design technique for creating presentation graphics. 
LDA 140
Green Building, Design, & Materials
LDA 050;  LDA 070.Pass One restricted to Sustainable Environmental Design majors. 
Sustainable design and construction techniques at site and building scales. Emphasizes real-world case studies, analysis of opportunities for actual sites, and application of LEED and Sustainable Sites green rating systems.
LDA 141
Community Participation & Design
LDA 021;  LDA 030;  LDA 050;  LDA 070.Restricted to Landscape Architecture and Sustainable Environmental Design majors.
Introduction to community participation and design. Incorporates social and cultural factors, public and community processes, theories and practices related to human-environment behavior; community involvement in design, social analysis, community engagement, accessibility, diversity and politics of place.
LDA 142
Applying Sustainable Strategies
LDA 140;  LDA 141.Restricted to Sustainable Environmental Design Majors.
Capstone class examines case studies and techniques of sustainable development. Student teams will develop detailed proposals for real-world sites.
LDA 160
Design & Build Studio
LDA 001;  LDA 002;  LDA 003;  LDA 021;  LDA 030;  LDA 050;  LDA 070.Restricted to Landscape Architecture majors.
Introduction to the spatial design and construction of small-scale projects. Hands-on approach to learning and understanding materials (including wood, concrete, and stone) and methods in landscape construction, and the application of technical skills (including detailing, cost estimation, and specifications).
LDA 161
Professional Practice & Construction Documents
LDA 171.Open to Landscape Architecture majors only.
Legal and professional aspects of landscape architecture, including the development of construction documents (drawings and specifications), proposal writing, fee calculations, project management, cost estimation, and insurance.
LDA 170
Site Planning & Design Studio
LDA 160.Open to Landscape Architecture majors only.
Application of place-making and problem-solving skills to local landscape sites. Analysis of social and environmental conditions in the field. Lectures link design projects to contemporary theories and practices. 
LDA 171
Urban Design & Planning Studio
LDA 170.Restricted to Landscape Architecture majors.
Studio designing large-scale landscapes at regional, sub-regional, and neighborhood scales. Focuses on understanding complex social, economic, and environmental factors, developing sustainability priorities and strategies, and applying them through design and policy.
LDA 180
Advanced Design & Planning Studio
LDA 060;  LDA 160;  LDA 170;  LDA 171;  LDA 172.Restricted to Landscape Architecture majors or consent of instructor.
Application of advanced theories and methods of design and planning to real-world projects.
LDA 182
Advanced Landscape Architecture Studio I
LDA 171.Restricted to Landscape Architecture majors or consent of instructor.
Landscape architecture studio featuring advanced studies and applications of creative work, design, technology and/or theory. One day-long field trip required.
LDA 183
Advanced Landscape Architecture Studio II
LDA 182.Restricted to Landscape Architecture majors or consent of instructor.
Landscape architecture studio featuring advanced studies and applications of creative work, design, technology and/or theory. One day-long field trip required.
LDA 184
Capstone Landscape Architecture Studio
LDA 183.Restricted to Landscape Architecture majors or consent of instructor.
Capstone studio that synthesizes learning objectives within the senior-level Landscape Architecture studio sequence. Students required to apply creative problem solving, design theory, technology, and representation skills towards a design approach that addresses complex, real-world environmental design problems.
LDA 191
Landscape Architecture Planning & Design Studio
LDA 001;  LDA 070;  LDA 170;  or Consent of Instructor.Priority to Landscape Architecture majors.
Faculty initiated workshops featuring advanced studies and applications of original work in landscape architecture. May be taught abroad.
LDA 192
Internship in Landscape Architecture
Consent of Instructor.  Senior standing in Landscape Architecture.
Professional field experience in landscape architecture.
LDA 193A
Senior Project in Landscape Architecture
Senior standing in Landscape Architecture.Limited enrollment.
Projects will focus on a critical area of landscape architectural design, planning, planning, analysis, communication, or research. Required of all Landscape Architecture majors.
LDA 193B
Senior Project in Landscape Architecture
LDA 193A;  And senior standing in Landscape Architecture.Limited enrollment.
Projects will focus on a critical area of landscape architectural design, planning, analysis, communication, or research. Required of all Landscape Architecture majors.
LDA 197T
Tutoring in Landscape Architecture
Consent of Instructor.
Tutoring in Landscape Architecture courses.
LDA 198
Directed Group Study in Landscape Architecture
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.
LDA 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates in Landscape Architecture
Consent of Instructor.

LDA 200
Citizenship, Democracy, & Public Space
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Introduction to seminal works in political theory, philosophy, and the social sciences that focus on citizenship and the public sphere; development of critical perspective regarding restructuring of public space in a pluralistic and global culture; discussion of contemporary case studies.
LDA 201
Theory & Philosophy of the Designed Environment
LDA 140;  Or the equivalent; graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Examines the major theories of environmental design. Epistemology of design serves as framework to examine modern landscape architecture, architecture, urban design and planning. Normative theories of design are reviewed along with the social and environmental sciences.
LDA 204
Case Studies in Landscape Design & Research
Graduate standing in Landscape Architecture, Ecology, Geography or Community Development or consent of instructor.
Real-world designed environment situations where creative activity and/or basic research is the primary product.
LDA 210
Advanced Landscape Architecture Studio
LDA 113 or the equivalent; graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Exposes students to real-world, designed-environment situations where creative activity and/or basic research is the primary product. Advanced landscape problems will be utilized at the site, urban or rural scale.
LDA 270
Environment & Behavior
Graduate standing or consent of instructor; PSC 144 recommended.
Factors that influence human's interaction with their surroundings and the mechanisms used for recognizing and addressing general and specific human needs in community design and development decisions.
LDA 280
Landscape Conservation
Contact department for prerequisite courses; graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Focus is on land planning, design, and management techniques to further the goal of resource preservation. Examines current critical theory in the establishment and management of conservation areas.
LDA 290
Graduate Seminar in Landscape Architecture
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Seminar on selected topics in landscape architecture research, analysis, planning, design, communication, or education.
LDA 297
Practicum in Landscape Architecture
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Opportunity for students to work directly in the field with academicsat other institutions or with professionals in an office setting. Gives experience beyond the confines of campus and allows direct interaction with the community.
LDA 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

LIN 096
Directed Group Study in English as a Second Language
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study of topic in English as a Second Language (ESL).
LIN 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Intended for lower division students.
LIN 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.
Intended for lower division students.
LIN 103A
Linguistic Analysis I: Phonetics, Phonology, Morphology
LIN 001 recommended.
Introduction to fundamental methods and concepts used in linguistic analysis, focusing on phonetic, phonological, and morphological phenomena. Emphasizes development of analytical skills and appreciation of structural regularities and differences among languages. 
LIN 103B
Linguistic Analysis II: Morphology, Syntax, Semantics
LIN 001 recommended.
Introduction to fundamental methods and concepts used in linguistic analysis, focusing on morphological, syntactic, and semantic phenomena. Emphasizes development of analytical skills and appreciation of structural regularities and differences among languages. 
LIN 105
Topics in Language & Linguistics
Consent of Instructor.  LIN 001 recommended.
Detailed examination of a major contemporary linguistic theory, a major contemporary issue or related set of issues in linguistics, or the structure of a particular language or language family.
LIN 106
English Grammar
LIN 001 or LIN 001Y or ENG 003 or UWP 001;  or Consent of Instructor.
Survey of present-day English grammar as informed by contemporary linguistic theories. The major syntactic structures of English; their variation across dialects, styles, and registers; their development; and their usefulness in describing the conventions of English.
LIN 111
Introduction to Phonological Theory
LIN 103A recommended.
Contemporary phonological theory with emphasis on syllable structure, metrical structure, phonology-morphology interaction, and typological variation in these areas, from the perspective of optimality-theoretic approaches.
LIN 112
Phonetics
LIN 001 recommended.
Detailed examination of articulatory and acoustic phonetics.
LIN 121
Morphology
LIN 103A, 103B recommended.
Introduction to the analysis of word structure and the relation of word structure to the lexicon and other grammatical components.
LIN 127
Text Processing & Corpus Linguistics
LIN 001, LIN 005, LIN 006, or ANT 004 recommended.
Investigation of the lexical organization of human languages through corpus linguistics. Application of principles of linguistic analysis, automatic text processing, and statistical research to solving problems of textual evaluation and classification, as well as information retrieval and extraction. 
LIN 131
Introduction to Syntactic Theory
LIN 103B recommended.
Introduction to syntactic theory, primarily through the examination of a major theory of syntax, emphasizing theoretical reasoning, argumentation, and problems of theory building in syntax.
LIN 141
Semantics
LIN 103B recommended.
Linguistic study of meanings of words and phrases. Meanings expressed by lexical items and derivational and inflectional morphology. Contribution of argument structure, quantification, and coordination to meaning.
LIN 150
Languages of the World
LIN 001 or ANT 004 recommended.
Survey of the world's languages, their geographical distribution and classification, both genetic and typological.  Illustrative descriptions of several major languages from different geographical areas; pidgins and creoles, lingua francas and other languages of widespread use.
LIN 151
Historical Linguistics
LIN 103A recommended.
Description and methods of the historical study of language, including the comparative method and internal reconstruction; sound change, morphological change, syntactic change, semantic change.
LIN 152
Language Universals & Typology
LIN 103B recommended.
Investigation into common features of all human languages and the classification of languages in terms of their structural features. Theories of universal grammar. Detailed discussion of non-Indo-European languages and comparison with English.
LIN 160
American Voices
LIN 001 or LIN 001Y or ANT 004;  Or upper division standing recommended.
Explores the forms of American English: traditional notions of regional dialects and increasingly important social dialects, reflecting age, class, gender, race, ethnicity, and sexual orientation. Influence of language attitudes on perception of dialect speakers; dialect in media, education, and literature.
LIN 163
Language, Gender, & Society
LIN 001 or ANT 004 recommended.
Investigation of real and putative (stereotyped) gender-linked differences in language structure and usage, with a consideration of some social and psychological consequences of such differences. Focus is on English, but other languages are also discussed.
LIN 166
The Spanish Language in the United States
LIN 001 or LIN 001Y or SPA 111N;  SPA 023;  Or equivalent to SPA 023 recommended.
Linguistic features of the varieties of the Spanish language spoken throughout the United States; phonology, morphology, syntax, vocabulary. Focus on the relationship between United States Spanish and other world varieties of Spanish, within a historical framework.
LIN 171
Introduction to Psycholinguistics
(LIN 001 or LIN 001Y);  LIN 103A, LIN 103B recommended.
Introduction to psychological issues relating to the implementationof language and linguistic structure during speech production and comprehension and to the implications of research in psychology and related fields for linguistic theory.
LIN 173
Language Development
(LIN 001 or LIN 001Y);  or Consent of Instructor.  LIN 103A, 103B recommended.
Theory and research on children's acquisition of their native language, including the sound system, grammatical systems, and basic semantic categories. 
LIN 175
Biological Basis of Language
Consent of Instructor.  LIN 001 recommended.
Overview of issues in the field of neurolinguistics and techniques used to explore representation of language in the human brain.
LIN 177
Computational Linguistics
Consent of Instructor.  LIN 001 recommended.
Understanding the nature of language through computer modeling of linguistic abilities.  Relationships between human cognition and computer representations of cognitive processing.
LIN 180
Second Language Learning & Teaching
LIN 001 or LIN 001Y;  Or equivalent recommended.
Psycholinguistic and sociolinguistic theories of second language learning. Connections between theoretical perspectives and pedagogical practices in formal and informal second language settings, with focus on tutoring. Impact of sociocontextual factors (e.g., gender, ethnicity). Fieldwork requirement.
LIN 192
Internship in Linguistics
LIN 001 or LIN 001Y;  Or equivalent course; consent of instructor.
Internship applying linguistic-related skills to a fieldwork project in areas such as media, law, or industry, in approved organizations or institutions. Maximum of 4 units applicable toward major.
LIN 194H
Special Study for Honors Students
Consent of Instructor.  Open only to linguistics majors of senior standing who qualify for Honors Program.
Guided research, under the direction of a faculty member approved by the Program Director, leading to a senior honors thesis.
LIN 197T
Tutoring in Linguistics
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing and consent of department chairperson.
Leading of small voluntary discussion groups affiliated with one of the department's regular courses.
LIN 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

LIN 200A
Foundations of Linguistics I
Graduate standing.
Survey of fundamental issues raised by pre-generative linguistics in the 20th century, with emphasis on issues crucial to applications of linguistics.
LIN 200B
Foundations of Linguistics II
Graduate standing.
Survey of fundamental issues raised by orthodox generative linguistics, with emphasis on issues crucial to  applications of linguistics.
LIN 200C
Foundations of Linguistics III
Graduate standing.
Survey of fundamental issues raised by contemporary linguistic theories lying outside the generative grammar orthodoxy, with emphasis on issues crucial to applications of linguistics.
LIN 205A
Topics in Linguistic Theory & Methods
Consent of Instructor.
Advanced study of current problems in linguistic theory and methodology. 
LIN 205B
Topics in Linguistic Theory & Methods
Consent of Instructor.
Advanced study of current problems in linguistic theory and methodology. 
LIN 205C
Topics in Linguistic Theory & Methods
Consent of Instructor.
Advanced study of current problems in linguistic theory and methodology. 
LIN 205D
Topics in Linguistic Theory & Methods
Consent of Instructor.
Advanced study of current problems in linguistic theory and methodology.
LIN 211
Advanced Phonological Theory & Analysis
LIN 111.
Critical examination of current phonological theories.
LIN 212
Advanced Phonetics
LIN 112.
Advanced investigation of the physiological basis of speech articulation and acoustic phonetics.
LIN 231
Advanced Syntactic Theory & Analysis
LIN 131.
Critical survey of contemporary theories of syntax.
LIN 241
Advanced Syntactic Theory & Analysis
LIN 141;  or Consent of Instructor.
Advanced critical exploration of contemporary theories of linguistic semantics.
LIN 251
Principles of Historical Linguistics
LIN 151.
Advanced analysis of the theory and methods of historical linguistics.
LIN 252
Romance Linguistics
LIN 151.
Examination of the development of the Romance languages from Proto-Romance to the modern era. Application and critical examination ofmethods of historical and comparative linguistics in particular areas of structural change in Romance.
LIN 260
Variation in Speech Communities
LIN 281;  or Consent of Instructor.
Linguistic variability in time, space, and society. Theoretical issues related to social and linguistic constraints in variation; issues and methods in the quantitative analysis of variation. Speech community, quantitative analytic methods, and the scope of sociolinguistic competence.
LIN 263
Discourse Analysis: Text in Context
Graduate standing.
Introduction to and application of leading theoretical approaches to the analysis of discourse. Approaches to the analysis of (spoken and written) text in context, tools for analyzing different types of texts (narration, conversation, etc.). Theme/rheme, given/new, anaphora, discourse markers, and other lexical/grammatical features.
LIN 264
Current Issues in Language & Gender
Graduate standing; prior coursework in Linguistics, Gender Studies, or Cultural Studies is desirable; no expectation of bilingual proficiency.
Exploration of the construction and performance of gender through language in cross-cultural perspective and in a variety of contexts: informal conversations, narratives, workplaces, schools, households, the mass media. Special topics may include: language acquisition; multilingualism; ecofeminism; queer theory.
LIN 280
Theories of Second Language Acquisition
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Covers theoretical perspectives that direct or have directed research in second language acquisition; explores the relationship between linguistics and language teaching and deals with the individual variables that influence second language learning.
LIN 281
Research Methods in TESOL/SLD
LIN 280.
Students will study a variety of research methods in second language research; evaluate research designs and methods of analyses, formulate research questions and hypotheses and design a study of their own, think about various kinds of data they can collect.
LIN 289
Pedagogical Applications of Second Language Acquisition Theory
LIN 280.
Pedagogical implications of various theories of second language acquisition, facilitation of language acquisition in classroom settings, and techniques for conducting classroom-based research in language learning.
LIN 297T
English as a Second Language Teaching/Tutoring
LIN 300 or LIN 301 or LIN 302 (can be concurrent);  and Consent of Instructor.
Teaching classes for ESL graduate students. Aiding the ESL undergraduate composition classes; tutoring foreign graduate student Teaching Assistants in pronunciation. Does not fulfill requirement toward the M.A. degree.
LIN 298
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

LIN 300
Language Pedagogy
Graduate standing in Linguistics or consent of instructor; concurrent enrollment in LIN 297T recommended.
Methods of teaching second languages to nonnative speakers, stressing particularly recent linguistic methodology and techniques, as related to teaching and tutoring in the UC Davis ESL program.
LIN 301
Teaching Academic Literacy
LIN 300;  or Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Methods of teaching advanced academic literacy in a second language, with a focus on ESL composition.  Lesson development, teaching and tutoring in the UC Davis ESL program.
LIN 302
Recent Research & Special Projects in TESOL
LIN 300;  LIN 301.
Review of recent research in second language acquisition and the teaching of English to speakers of other languages. Continued teaching and tutoring in the UC Davis ESL clinic. Each student designs and reports on a classroom research project.
LIN 305
Second Language Literacy & Technology
LIN 002 or equivalent coursework/experience in second language pedagogy; consent of instructor; graduate students only.Limited enrollment.
Exploration of literacy theory and critical pedagogy in relation to new instructional and communication technologies. Practicum experience in teaching second language literacy; reflection on connections between theory and practice. Fieldwork requirement.
LIN 310
Language Pedagogy for Teacher Educators
Admission to Ph.D. program in Linguistics or Foreign Languages, or permission of instructor; significant language teaching experience.
Current issues in second language pedagogy, with a focus on communicative methodology, participatory curriculum design, academic literacy, and the social contexts of teaching. Emphasis on reflective teaching and action research. Mentoring of new language teachers.
LIN 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Graduate standing.

LTS 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study.
LTS 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study.
MAE 207
Engineering Experimentation & Uncertainty Analysis
EME 107A;  EME 107B.
Design and analysis of engineering experiments with emphasis on measurement standards, data analysis, regressions and general and detailed uncertainty analysis, including statistical treatment of experimental data intervals, propagation of bias and precision errors, correlated bias approximations, and using jitter programs.
MAE 210A
Advanced Fluid Mechanics & Heat Transfer
ENG 103;  ENG 105;  EME 165.
Development of differential equations governing continuity, momentum and energy transfer. Solutions in laminar flow for exact cases, low and high Reynolds numbers and lubrication theory. Dynamics of inviscid flow.
MAE 210B
Advanced Fluid Mechanics & Heat Transfer
MAE 210A.
Study of stability and transition to turbulence. Introduction to the physics of turbulence. Modeling of turbulence for numerical determination of momentum and heat transfer.
MAE 211
Fluid Flow & Heat Transfer
ENG 103;  ENG 105;  EME 165;  Or equivalent.
Design aspects of selected topics such as: heat conduction, fins; heat transport in ducts, boundary layers and separated flows; heat exchangers.
MAE 212
Biomedical Heat & Mass Transport Processes
EME 165;  EBS 125;  ECH 153;  Or the equivalent.
Application of principles of heat and mass transfer to biomedical systems related to heat exchange between the biomedical system and its environment, mass transfer across cell membranes and the design and analysis of artificial human organs.
MAE 213
Advanced Turbulence Modeling
MAE 210B.
Methods of analyzing turbulence; kinematics and dynamics of homogeneous turbulence; Reynolds stress and heat-flux equations; second order closures and their simplification; numerical methods; application to boundary layer-type flows; two-dimensional and three-dimensional hydraulic and environmental flows.
MAE 216
Advanced Thermodynamics
ENG 105.
Study of topics important to energy conversion systems, propulsion and other systems using high temperature gases. Classical thermodynamicsand quantum statistical mechanics of nonreacting and chemically reacting gases, gas mixtures, and other substances.
MAE 217
Combustion
ENG 103;  ENG 105;  EME 106.Restricted to graduate students.
Review of chemical thermodynamics and chemical kinetics. Discussion of reacting flows, their governing equations and transport phenomena; detonations; laminar flame structure and turbulent combustion.
MAE 218
Advanced Energy Systems
ENG 103;  ENG 105;  Or the equivalent.
Review of options available for advanced power generation. Detailed study of basic power balances, component efficiencies, and overall powerplant performance for one advanced concept such as a fusion, magnetohydrodynamic, or solar electric powerplant.
MAE 219
Introduction to Scientific Computing in Solid & Fluid Dynamics
ENG 103;  ENG 104.
Scientific calculations with finite element and finite difference methods for multi-dimensional problems in solid and fluid dynamics are performed with examples in C, C++, FORTRAN, and MATLAB script files. Derivation of the basic equations of motion in finite volume form with applications to elasticity, waves.
MAE 220
Mechanical Vibrations
ENG 122.
Multiple degrees of freedom; damping measures; Rayleigh's method; vibration absorbers; eigenvalues and modeshapes; modal coordinates; forced vibrations; random processes and vibrations; autocorrelation;spectral density; first passage and fatigue failure; nonlinear systems; phase plane.
MAE 222
Advanced Dynamics
ENG 102.
Dynamics of particles, rigid bodies and distributed systems with engineering applications; generalized coordinates; Hamilton's principle; Lagrange's equations; Hamilton-Jacobi theory; modal dynamics orthogonality; wave dynamics; dispersion.
MAE 223
Multibody Dynamics
ENG 102.
Coupled rigid-body kinematics/dynamics; reference frames; vector differentiation; configuration and motion constraints; holonomicity; generalized speeds; partial velocities; mass; inertia tensor/theorems; angular momentum; generalized forces; comparing Newton/Euler, Lagrange's, Kane's methods; computer-aided equation derivation; orientation; Euler; Rodrigues parameters.
MAE 225
Spatial Kinematics & Robotics
MAE 222;  C Language.
Spatial kinematics, screw theory, spatial mechanisms analysis and synthesis, robot kinematics and dynamics, robot workspace, path planning, robot programming, real-time architecture and software implementation.
MAE 226
Acoustics & Noise Control
ENG 122.
Description of sound using normal modes and waves; interaction between vibrating solids and sound fields; sound absorption in enclosed spaces; sound transmission through barriers; applications in design, acoustic enclosures and sound walls, room acoustics, design of quiet machinery.
MAE 228
Introduction to BioMEMS
B.S. engineering discipline or consent of instructor.
Ideal for beginning graduate or advanced undergraduate students interested in microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) topics related to biological applications. Covers topics from various disciplines related to BioMEMS: mechanical, electrical, biomedical, chemical engineering, and materials science.
MAE 229
Design & Analysis of Micro-Electromechanical Systems
(ENG 045 or ENG 045Y);  ENG 100;  ENG 104;  and Consent of Instructor.  ENG 122 recommended.
Mechanical design of micro-electronmechanical systems (MEMS). Device modeling: lumped parameter models; energy methods; nonlinearities; electrical and mechanical noise sources. Actuation and measurement methods: capacitive, piezoresistive, thermal, piezoelectric, and optical techniques.  Review of basic electronics: bridge circuits, amplitude modulation; lock-in detection.
MAE 232
Skeletal Tissue Mechanics
ENG 104B.
Overview of the mechanical properties of the various tissues in the musculoskeletal system, the relationship of these properties to anatomic and histologic structure, and the changes in these properties caused by aging and disease. Tissues covered include bone, cartilage and synovial fluid, ligament and tendon.
MAE 234
Design & Dynamics of Road Vehicles
EME 134.
Analysis and numerical simulation of road vehicles with on design applications.
MAE 237
Analysis & Design of Composite Structures
ENG 104;  Or equivalent.
Modeling and analysis methodology for composite structures including response and failure. Laminated plate bending theory. Introduction to failure processes. Includes discussion of aerospace structural analysis.
MAE 238
Advanced Aerodynamic Design & Optimization
Consent of Instructor.
Application of aerodynamic theory to obtain optimum aerodynamic shapes. Both analytic solutions and solutions obtained with numerical optimization techniques will be examined. Includes introduction to the calculus of variations and numerical optimization techniques.
MAE 239
Advanced Finite Elements & Optimization
ENG 180 or EAD 115 or MAT 128C.
Introduction to advanced finite elements and design optimization methods, with application to modeling of complex mechanical, aerospace and biomedical systems. Application of states of the art in finite elements in optimum design of components under realistic loading conditions and constraints.  
MAE 240
Computational Methods in Nonlinear Mechanics
EAD 115 or MAT 128B or ENG 180.
Deformation of solids and the motion of fluids treated with state-of-the-art computational methods. Numerical treatment of nonlinear dynamics; classification of coupled problems; applications of finite element methods to mechanical, aeronautical, and biological systems.
MAE 242
Stability of Thin-Walled Structures
ENG 104;  Or equivalent.
Static stability of thin-walled aerospace structures treated from both theoretical and practical design perspectives. Both monolithic and composite construction considered. Buckling of stiffened panels, shells and thin-walled beams, experimental methods and failure/crippling processes.
MAE 245
Micro- & Nano-Technology in Life Sciences
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Survey of biodevice design from engineering and biological perspectives; micro-/nano-fabrication techniques; surface science and mass transport; essential biological processes and models; proposal development skills on merging aforementioned themes. 
MAE 248
Advanced Turbomachinery
ENG 103;  ENG 105.
Preliminary aerodynamic design of axial and radial flow compressors and turbines. Design of diffusers. Selection of turbomachine  and configurations and approximations to optimum dimensions and flow angles. Introduction to through flow analysis. Rotating stall and surge, andaeromechanical considerations.
MAE 250A
Advanced Methods in Mechanical Design
EME 150A;  EME 150B;  Or the equivalents or consent of instructor.
Applications of advanced techniques of solid mechanics to mechanical design problems. Coverage of advanced topics in stress analysis andstatic failure theories with emphasis in design of machine elements. Design projects emphasizing advanced analysis tools for life cycle evaluation.
MAE 250B
Advanced Methods in Mechanical Design
MAE 250A.
Applications of advanced techniques of solid mechanics to mechanical design problems. Advanced topics in variational methods of mechanics with emphasis in design of machine elements. Design projects emphasizingadvanced analysis tools.
MAE 250C
Mechanical Performance of Materials
Undergraduate course in stress analysis and mechanical behavior of materials.
Occurrence, mechanisms, and prediction of fatigue and fracture phenomenon. Use of stress and strain to predict crack initiation. Use of fracture mechanics to predict failure and crack propagation. Effects of stress concentration, manufacturing, load sequence, irregular loading, and multi-axial loading.
MAE 251
Mechatronics System Design
(EME 154,  EME 172) or (EEC 157A,  EEC 157B).
Motion mechanism design, electric actuator, power electronics motion contol, sensor technologies, personal computer-based control systems design, motion control general operating system and real time operating systems, motion control software design, discrete event control software design.
MAE 252
Information Processing for Autonomous Robotics
EME 154;  EME 171;  ENG 006;  EME 005;  or equivalent programming experience to ENG 006 & EME 005; MAE 154, MAE 171, or consent of instructor.
Computational principles for sensing, reasoning, and navigation for autonomous robots.  
MAE 253
Network Theory & Applications
MAT 022A;  MAT 022B;  (STA 013 or STA 013Y or STA 120);  Experience with computer software, or consent of instructor.
Develops the mathematical theory underlying growth, structure and function of networks with applications to physical, social, biological and engineered systems. Topics include network growth, resilience, epidemiology, phase transitions, software and algorithms, routing and search control, cascading failures.
MAE 254
Engineering Software Design
EME 005;  ENG 180.
Principle and design of engineering software. Advanced topics in engineering software design, applications of object-oriented programming, very high-level languages, real-time multi-thread computing and sensor fusion, Web-based network computing, graphics, and GUI in engineering.
MAE 255
Computer Aided Design & Manufacturing
Proficiency in a high level programming language such as Fortran, Pascal or C.
Representation and processing of geometrical information in design and manufacturing. Numeric and symbolic computations.  Coordinate systems and transformations. Bezier and B-spline curves and surfaces. Interpolation and approximation methods.  Intersections, offsets, and blends. Path planning for machining, inspection, and robotics applications.
MAE 258
Hybrid Electric Vehicle System Theory & Design
EME 150B;  Graduate standing in Mechanical and Aeronautical Engineering.
Advanced vehicle design for fuel economy, performance, and low emissions, considering regulations, societal demands and manufacturability. Analysis and verification of computer design and control of vehicle systems in real vehicle tests. Advanced engine concepts.
MAE 262
Advanced Aerodynamics
EAE 126.
Study of invicid and viscous flows about aerodynamic shapes at subsonic,transonic and supersonic conditions. Application of aerodynamic theory to design for reduced drag and increased lift.
MAE 263
Introduction to Computational Aerodynamics & Fluid Dynamics
ENG 103;  or Consent of Instructor.
Introduction to numerical methods for solution of fluid flow problems. Discretization techniques and solution algorithms. Finite difference solutions to classical model equations pertinent to wave phenomena, diffusion phenomena, or equilibrium. Application to the incompressible Navier-Stokes equation.
MAE 267
Parallel Computations in Fluid/Thermal Sciences
EME 106;  EME 165;  ENG 180;  or Consent of Instructor.  Or equivalent to ENG 180.Graduate or junior/senior undergraduate as a technical elective.
Programming languages and constructs for engineering analysis on parallel computers including MPI (distributed), OpenMP (shared), and Fortran95.  
MAE 268
Wind Power Engineering
ENG 102;  ENG 103;  or Consent of Instructor.  Or equivalent courses.
Fundamentals for understanding the conversion of wind power to mechanical power and electricity. Related engineering, economic and societal issues.
MAE 269
Fuel Cell Systems
EME 106;  EME 107;  EME 165;  or Consent of Instructor.  Or equivalent courses.Graduate or junior/senior undergraduate as a technical elective.
Basics of electrochemistry and fuel cell engines in mobile and stationary applications. Aspects of fuel cell energy converters and their subsystems including practice with existing fuel cell and hydrogen systems on campus.
MAE 271
Advanced Modeling & Simulation of Mechatronic Systems
EME 172;  or equivalent.
Multiport models of mechanical, electrical, hydraulic, and thermal devices; bond graphs, block diagrams and state space equations; modeling of multiple energy domain systems; three-dimensional mechanics; digital simulation laboratory.
MAE 272
Theory & Design of Control Systems
EME 172;  or the equivalent.
Mathematical representations of linear dynamical systems. Feedback principles; benefits and cost of feedback. Analysis and design of control systems based on classical and modern approaches, with emphasis on applications to mechanical and aeronautical systems.
MAE 273A
Single Input Single Output (SISO) Optimal Robust Control
EME 172;  MAE 272;  or Consent of Instructor.  EEC 250 recommended.Open to Graduate Students.
Analysis and design of SISO (Single Input Single Output) feedback control systems utilizing Youla Parameterization technique. Optimal control concepts (controllability, observability, Linear Quadratic Regulator) and an introduction to Kalman filtering and robust optimal control theory for designing H2/LQG and Hinf controllers. 
MAE 273B
Multiple Input Multiple Output (MIMO) Optimal Robust Control
MAE 272;  MAE 273A;  or Consent of Instructor.Open to Graduate Students.
Analysis and design of MIMO (Multiple Input Multiple Output) feedback control systems utilizing Youla Parameterization technique. Uncertainty modeling and  MIMO feedback control system design using loop shaping with Hinf/H2 system norm optimization techniques. 
MAE 274
Analysis & Design of Digital Control Systems
EME 172.
Discrete systems analysis; digital filtering; sample data systems; state space and transform design techniques; quantization effects; multi-input, multi-output systems.
MAE 275
Guidance & Control of Unmanned Aerial Systems
ENG 102;  EME 172;  or Consent of Instructor.  Familiarity with simulation tools, such as Matlab/Simulink, expected.Open to Graduate Students.
Introduction to Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS). Challenges in guiding and controlling limited-payload small and miniature aircraft systems. Coordinate frames, kinematics and dynamics, linear design models, autopilot design, sensor models, state estimation, design model for guidance, straight-line and orbit following, and path planning.
MAE 290C
Graduate Research Conference
Consent of Instructor.
Individual and/or group conference on problems, progress, and techniques in mechanical and aeronautical engineering research.
MAE 297
SEMINAR
Consent of Instructor.
Current topics in engineering including developments in mechanical and aeronautical engineering with presentations by students, faculty, and visitors.
MAE 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.

MAE 390
Teaching of Aeronautical Science & Engineering
Meet qualifications for teaching assistant and/or associate-in in Aeronautical Science and Engineering.
Methods of leading discussion groups or laboratory sections, writing and grading quizzes, use of laboratory equipment, and grading laboratory reports.
MAE 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Graduate standing.

MAT 012
Precalculus
Two years of high school algebra, plane geometry, plane trigonometry; and obtaining required score on the Precalculus Diagnostic Examination.
Topics selected for their use in calculus, including functions and their graphs, slope, zeroes of polynomials, exponential, logarithmic and trigonometric functions, sketching surfaces and solids.
MAT 016A
Short Calculus
Two years of high school algebra, plane geometry, plane trigonometry, and satisfying the Mathematics Placement Requirement.
Limits; differentiation of algebraic functions; analytic geometry; applications, in particular to maxima and minima problems.
MAT 016B
Short Calculus
MAT 016A C- or better or MAT 017A C- or better or MAT 021A C- or better or MAT 021AH C- or better.
Integration; calculus for trigonometric, exponential, and logarithmic functions; applications.  
MAT 016C
Short Calculus
MAT 016B C- or better or MAT 017B C- or better or MAT 021B C- or better or MAT 021BH C- or better.
Differential equations; partial derivatives; double integrals; applications; series.
MAT 017A
Calculus for Biology & Medicine
Two years of high school algebra, plane geometry, plane trigonometry, and analytical geometry, and satisfying the Mathematics Placement Requirement.
Introduction to differential calculus via applications in biology and medicine. Limits, derivatives of polynomials, trigonometric, and exponential functions, graphing, applications of the derivative to biology and medicine.
MAT 017B
Calculus for Biology & Medicine
MAT 016A C- or better or MAT 017A C- or better or MAT 021A C- or better or MAT 021AH C- or better.
Introduction to integral calculus and elementary differential equations via applications to biology and medicine. Fundamental theorem of calculus, techniques of integration including integral tables and numerical methods, improper integrals, elementary first order differential equations, applications in biology and medicine.
MAT 017C
Calculus for Biology & Medicine
MAT 017B C- or better.
Matrix algebra, functions of several variables, partial derivatives, systems of differential equations, and applications to biology and medicine.
MAT 021A
Calculus
Two years of high school algebra, plane geometry, plane trigonometry, and analytical geometry, and satisfying the Mathematics Placement Requirement.
Functions, limits, continuity. Slope and derivative. Differentiation of algebraic and transcendental functions. Applications to motion, natural growth, graphing, extrema of a function. Differentials. L'Hopital's rule.
MAT 021AH
Honors Calculus
A Precalculus Diagnostic Examination score significantly higher than the minimum for MAT 021A is required.
More intensive treatment of material covered in MAT 021A.
MAT 021AL
Emerging Scholars Program Calculus Workshop
MAT 021A (can be concurrent);  MAT 021A required concurrently.
Functions, limits, continuity. Slope and derivative. Same course content as MAT 021A. Enrollment for students in the Emerging Scholars Program by instructor's invitation only.
MAT 021B
Calculus
(MAT 021A C- or better or MAT 021AH C- or better) or MAT 017A B or better.
Continuation of MAT 021A. Definition of definite integral, fundamental theorem of calculus, techniques of integration. Application to area, volume, arc length, average of a function, improper integral, surface of revolution.
MAT 021BH
Honors Calculus
MAT 021A B or better or MAT 021AH B or better.
More intensive treatment of material covered in MAT 021B. Students completing MAT 021BH can continue with MAT 021CH or the regular MAT 021C.
MAT 021BL
Emerging Scholars Program Calculus Workshop
MAT 021B (can be concurrent);  Concurrent enrollment in MAT 021B.
Continuation of MAT 021A. Same course content as MAT 021B.  Enrollment for students in the Emerging Scholars Program by instructor's invitation only.
MAT 021C
Calculus
MAT 016C C- or better or MAT 017C C- or better or MAT 021B C- or better or MAT 021BH C- or better or MAT 017B B or better;.
Continuation of MAT 021B. Sequences, series, tests for convergence, Taylor expansions. Vector algebra, vector calculus, scalar and vector fields. Partial derivatives, total differentials. Applications to maximum and minimum problems in two or more variables. Applications to physical systems. 
MAT 021CH
Honors Calculus
MAT 021B B or better or MAT 021BH B or better.
More intensive treatment of material covered in MAT 021C.
MAT 021CL
Emerging Scholars Program Calculus Workshop
MAT 021C (can be concurrent);  Concurrent enrollment in MAT 021C.
Continuation of MAT 021B. Same course content as MAT 021C.  Enrollment for students in the Emerging Scholars Program by instructor's invitation only.
MAT 021D
Vector Analysis
(MAT 021C C- or better or MAT 021CH C- or better) or MAT 017C B or better.
Continuation of MAT 021C. Definite integrals over plane and solid regions in various coordinate systems. Line and surface integrals. Green's theorem, Stoke's theorem, divergence theorem.
MAT 021M
Accelerated Calculus
Grade of B or higher in both semesters of high school calculus or a score of 4 or higher on the Advanced Placement Calculus AB exam, and obtaining the required score on the Precalculus Diagnostic Examination and its trigonometric component.
Accelerated treatment of material from MAT 021A and MAT 021B, with detailed presentation of theory, definitions, and proofs, and treatment of computational aspects of calculus at a condensed but sophisticated level.
MAT 022A
Linear Algebra
(MAT 016C C- or better or MAT 017C C- or better or MAT 021C C- or better or MAT 021CH C- or better);  (ENG 006 or EME 005 or ECH 060 or MAT 022AL (can be concurrent)).
Matrices and linear transformations, determinants, eigenvalues, eigenvectors, diagonalization, factorization.
MAT 022AL
Linear Algebra Computer Laboratory
MAT 016C or MAT 017C or MAT 021C or MAT 021CH.
Introduction to MATLAB and its use in linear algebra.
MAT 022B
Differential Equations
(MAT 022A C- or better or MAT 067 C- or better).
Solutions of elementary differential equations.
MAT 025
Advanced Calculus
MAT 021C C- or better or MAT 021CH C- or better.
Introduction to the rigorous treatment of abstract mathematical analysis. Proofs in mathematics, induction, sets, cardinality; real number system, theory of convergence of sequences.
MAT 027A
Linear Algebra with Applications to Biology
MAT 017C C- or better or MAT 021C C- or better or MAT 021CH C- or better.
Introduction to linear algebra with biological, medical, and bioengineering applications. Matrix algebra, vector spaces, orthogonality, determinants, eigenvalues, eigenvectors, principal component analysis, singular value decomposition, and linear transformations. Computer labs cover mathematical and computational techniques for modeling biological systems.
MAT 027B
Differential Equations with Applications to Biology
MAT 027A C- or better or (MAT 022A C- or better,  (MAT 022AL C- or better or ENG 006 C- or better or EME 005 C- or better)).
Solutions of differential equations with biological, medical, and bioengineering applications. First and second order linear equations, phase plane analysis, nonlinear dynamics, Laplace transforms, and the diffusion equation. Computer labs cover mathematical and numerical techniques for modeling biological systems.
MAT 036
Fundamentals of Mathematics
Satisfaction of the Mathematics Placement Requirement.
Introduction to fundamental mathematical ideas selected from the principal areas of modern mathematics. Properties of the primes, the fundamental theorems of arithmetic, properties of the rationals and irrationals, binary and other number systems.
MAT 067
Modern Linear Algebra
MAT 021C C- or better or MAT 021CH C- or better.
Rigorous treatment of linear algebra; topics include vector spaces, bases and dimensions, orthogonal projections, eigenvalues and eigenvectors, similarity transformations, singular value decomposition and positive definiteness.
MAT 071A
Explorations in Elementary Mathematics
Two years of high school mathematics.
Weekly explorations of mathematical ideas related to the elementary school curriculum will be carried out by cooperative learning groups. Lectures will provide background and synthesize the results of group exploration.
MAT 071B
Explorations in Elementary Mathematics
Two years of high school mathematics.
Weekly explorations of mathematical ideas related to the elementary school curriculum will be carried out by cooperative learning groups. Lectures will provide background and synthesize the results of group exploration.
MAT 089
Elementary Problem Solving
High school mathematics through precalculus.
Solve and present solutions to challenging and interesting problems in elementary mathematics.  
MAT 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

MAT 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

MAT 107
Probability & Stochastic Processes with Applications to Biology
(MAT 027A C- or better or BIS 027A C- or better) or (MAT 022A C- or better,  (MAT 022AL C- or better or ENG 006 C- or better or EME 005 C- or better)).
Introduction to probability theory and stochastic processes with biological, medical, and bioengineering applications. Combinatorics, discrete and continuous random variables, Bayes formula, conditional probability, Markov chains, Poisson processes, and Brownian motion. Computer labs cover mathematical and computational modeling techniques.
MAT 108
Introduction to Abstract Mathematics
MAT 021B.
Rigorous treatment of mathematical concepts with emphasis on developing the ability to understand abstract mathematical ideas, to read and write mathematical concepts, and to prove theorems. Designed to serve as preparation for the more rigorous upper division courses.
MAT 111
History of Mathematics
MAT 025 or MAT 127A or MAT 067 or MAT 108 or MAT 114 or MAT 115A or MAT 141 or MAT 145;  8 units of upper division Mathematics.
History of mathematics from ancient times through the development of calculus. Mathematics from Arab, Hindu, Chinese and other cultures. Selected topics from the history of modern mathematics.
MAT 114
Convex Geometry
MAT 021C;  (MAT 022A or MAT 067).
Topics selected from the theory of convex bodies, convex functions, geometric inequalities, combinatorial geometry, and integral geometry. Designed to serve as preparation for the more rigorous upper division courses.
MAT 115A
Number Theory
MAT 021B.
Divisibility and related topics, diophantine equations, selected topics from the theory of prime numbers. Designed to serve as preparation for the more rigorous upper division courses.
MAT 115B
Number Theory
MAT 115A;  (MAT 022A or MAT 067).
Euler function, Moebius function, congruences, primitive roots, quadratic reciprocity law.  
MAT 116
Differential Geometry
MAT 021D;  MAT 022B;  (MAT 022A or MAT 067).
Vector analysis, curves, and surfaces in three dimensions.  
MAT 118A
Partial Differential Equations: Elementary Methods
MAT 021D;  MAT 022B;  (MAT 022A or MAT 067).
Derivation of partial differential equations; separation of variables; equilibrium solutions and Laplace's equation; Fourier series; method of characteristics for the one dimensional wave equation.  Solution of nonhomogeneous equations.  
MAT 118B
Partial Differential Equations: Eigenfunction Expansions
MAT 118A.
Sturm-Liouville Theory; selfadjoint operators; mixed boundary conditions; partial differential equations in two and three dimensions;Eigenvalue problems in circular domains; nonhomogeneous problems and the method of eigenfunction expansions; Poisson's Equations.
MAT 118C
Partial Differential Equations: Green's Functions & Transforms
MAT 118B.
Green's functions for one-dimensional problems and Poisson's equation; Fourier transforms; Green's Functions for time dependent problems; Laplace transform and solution of partial differential equations.
MAT 119A
Ordinary Differential Equations
MAT 021D;  MAT 022B;  (MAT 022A or MAT 067).
Scalar and planar autonomous systems; nonlinear systems and linearization; existence and uniqueness of solutions; matrix solution of linear systems; phase plane analysis; stability analysis; bifurcation theory; Liapunov's method; limit cycles; Poincare Bendixon theory.
MAT 119B
Ordinary Differential Equations
MAT 119A.
Lorentz equations; Poincare maps; center manifolds and normal forms; scalar and planar maps; phase space analysis for iterated maps; period-doubling bifurcation; Lyapunov exponent; chaos and symbolic dynamics; strange attractors; fractals.
MAT 124
Mathematical Biology
MAT 022B;  (MAT 022A or MAT 067).
Methods of mathematical modeling of biological systems including difference equations, ordinary differential equations, stochastic and dynamic programming models.  Computer simulation methods applied to biological systems.  Applications to population growth, cell biology, physiology, evolutionary ecology and protein clustering.  MATLAB programming required.
MAT 125A
Real Analysis
MAT 025.
Functions, limits of functions, continuity and uniform continuity, sequences of functions, series of real numbers, series of functions, power series.
MAT 125B
Real Analysis
MAT 125A;  (MAT 067 or (MAT 022A,  MAT 108)).
Theory of the derivative, Taylor series, integration, partial derivatives, Implicit Function Theorem.
MAT 127A
Real Analysis
(MAT 021C or MAT 021CH);  (MAT 067 or (MAT 022A,  MAT 108).
Real numbers, sequences, series, and continuous functions.
MAT 127B
Real Analysis
MAT 127A.
Derivatives, integrals, sequences of functions, and power series.
MAT 127C
Real Analysis
MAT 127B.
Metric spaces and multi-variable calculus.
MAT 128A
Numerical Analysis
MAT 021C;  (ECS 032A or ENG 006 or EME 005 or ECS 030).
Error analysis, approximation, interpolation, numerical differentiation and integration. Programming in language such as Pascal, Fortran, or BASIC required.
MAT 128B
Numerical Analysis in Solution of Equations
(MAT 022A or MAT 067);  (ECS 032A or ENG 006 or EME 005 or ECS 030).
Solution of nonlinear equations and nonlinear systems. Minimization of functions of several variables. Simultaneous linear equations. Eigenvalue problems. Linear programming. Programming in language such as Pascal, Fortran, or BASIC required.
MAT 128C
Numerical Analysis in Differential Equations
(MAT 022A or MAT 067);  MAT 022B;  (ECS 032A or ENG 006 or EME 005 or ECS 030).
Difference equations, operators, numerical solutions of ordinary and partial differential equations. Programming in language such as Pascal, Fortran, or BASIC required.
MAT 129
Fourier Analysis
MAT 021D;  MAT 022B;  (MAT 022A or MAT 067);  MAT 025.
Fourier series and integrals, orthogonal sets of functions. Topics selected from trigonometric approximation, orthogonal polynomials, applications to signal and image processing, numerical analysis, and differential equations.  
MAT 133
Mathematical Finance
(MAT 067 or (MAT 022A,  MAT 108)),  MAT 135A.
Analysis and evaluation of deterministic and random cash flow streams, yield and pricing of basic financial instruments, interest rate theory, mean-variance portfolio theory, capital asset pricing models, utility functions and general principles. MATLAB programming required.
MAT 135A
Probability
MAT 021C;  (MAT 108 or MAT 025).
Probability space; discrete probability, combinatorial analysis; independence, conditional probability; random variables, discrete and continuous distributions, probability mass function, joint and marginal density functions; expectation, moments, variance, Chebyshev inequality; sums of random variables, random walk, large number law, central limit theorem.
MAT 135B
Stochastic Processes
MAT 135A;  (MAT 022A or MAT 067).
Generating functions, branching processes, characteristic function; Markov chains; convergence of random variables, law of iterated logarithm; random processes, Brownian motion, stationary processes, renewal processes, queueing theory, martingales.  
MAT 141
Euclidean Geometry
MAT 021B;  (MAT 022A or MAT 067).
Axiomatic and analytic examination of Euclidean geometry from an advanced point of view.  In particular, a discussion of its relation to other geometries. Designed to serve as preparation for the more rigorous upper division courses.
MAT 145
Combinatorics
MAT 021C.
Combinatorial methods using basic graph theory, counting methods, generating functions, and recurrence relations. Designed to serve as preparation for the more rigorous upper division courses.
MAT 146
Algebraic Combinatorics
((MAT 022A,  MAT 108) or MAT 067));  MAT 145.
Enumeration, Polya theory, generating functions, current topics in algebraic combinatorics.
MAT 147
Topology
MAT 025.
Basic notions of point-set and combinatorial topology.  
MAT 148
Discrete Mathematics
MAT 067 or (MAT 022A,  MAT 108).
Coding theory, error correcting codes, finite fields and the algebraic concepts needed in their development.
MAT 150A
Modern Algebra
MAT 067 or (MAT 022A,  MAT 108).
Basic concepts of groups, symmetries of the plane. Emphasis on the techniques used in the proof of the ideas (Lemmas, Theorems, etc.) developing these concepts. Precise thinking, proof writing, and the ability to deal with abstraction. 
MAT 150B
Modern Algebra
MAT 150A.
Bilinear forms, rings, factorization, modules.
MAT 150C
Modern Algebra
MAT 150B.
Group representations, fields, Galois theory.
MAT 160
Mathematics for Data Analytics & Decision Making
MAT 167.
Relational model; relational algebra, relational calculus, normal forms, functional and multivalued dependencies, separability. Cost benefit analysis of physical database design and reorganization. Performance via analytical modeling, simulation, and queueing theory. Block accesses; buffering; operating system contention; CPU intensive operations.  
MAT 165
Mathematics & Computers
MAT 022A or MAT 067;  (MAT 025 or MAT 108 or MAT 114 or MAT 115A or MAT 145).
Introduction to computational mathematics, symbolic computation, and computer generated/verified proofs in algebra, analysis and geometry. Investigation of rigorous new mathematics developed in conjunction with modern computational questions and the role that computers play in mathematical conjecture and experimentation.  
MAT 167
Applied Linear Algebra
MAT 022A or MAT 067.
Applications of linear algebra; LU and QR matrix factorizations, eigenvalue and singular value matrix decompositions. 
MAT 168
Optimization
MAT 021C;  ((MAT 022A,  MAT 108) or MAT 067)).
Linear programming, simplex method. Basic properties of unconstrained nonlinear problems, descent methods, conjugate direction method. Constrained minimization. Programming language required. 
MAT 180
Special Topics
MAT 025;  (MAT 067 or (MAT 022A,  MAT 108)).
Special topics from various fields of modern, pure, and applied mathematics.  Some recent topics include Knot Theory, General Relativity, and Fuzzy Sets.
MAT 185A
Complex Analysis 
(MAT 067 or (MAT 022A,  MAT 108)),  MAT 125A.
Complex number system, analyticity and the Cauchy-Riemann equations, elementary functions, complex integration, power and Laurent series expansions, residue theory.  
MAT 185B
Complex Analysis
MAT 185A.
Analytical functions, elementary functions and their mapping properties, applications of Cauchy's integral theorem, conformal mapping and applications to heat flow and fluid mechanics. 
MAT 189
Advanced Problem Solving
MAT 025;  ((MAT 022A,  MAT 108) or MAT 067).
Solution and presentation of advanced problem solving techniques. Solve and present interesting and challenging problems of all areas of mathematics.
MAT 192
Internship in Applied Mathematics 
Consent of Instructor.
Supervised work experience in applied mathematics. Final report.
MAT 194
Undergraduate Thesis
Consent of Instructor.
Independent research under supervision of a faculty member. Student will submit written report in thesis form.
MAT 197TC
Tutoring Mathematics in the Community
Consent of Instructor.
Special projects in mathematical education developing techniques for mathematics instruction and tutoring on an individual or small group basis.
MAT 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

MAT 200
Problem-Solving in Analysis
MAT 201A (can be concurrent);  MAT 201B (can be concurrent).
Problem-solving in graduate analysis: continuous functions, metric spaces, Banach & Hilbert spaces, bounded linear operators, the spectral theorem, distributions, Fourier series & transforms, Lp spaces, Sobolev spaces.
MAT 201A
Analysis
Graduate standing in Mathematics or Applied Mathematics, or consent of instructor.
Metric and normed spaces. Continuous functions. Topological, Hilbert, and Banach spaces. Fourier series. Spectrum of bounded and compact linear operators. Linear differential operators and Green's functions. Distributions. Fourier transform. Measure theory. Lp and Sobolev spaces. Differential calculus and variational methods.
MAT 201B
Analysis
Graduate standing in Mathematics or Applied Mathematics, or consent of instructor.
Metric and normed spaces. Continuous functions. Topological, Hilbert, and Banach spaces. Fourier series. Spectrum of bounded and compact linear operators. Linear differential operators and Green's functions. Distributions. Fourier transform. Measure theory. Lp and Sobolev spaces. Differential calculus and variational methods.
MAT 201C
Analysis
Graduate standing in Mathematics or Applied Mathematics, or consent of instructor.
Metric and normed spaces. Continuous functions. Topological, Hilbert, and Banach spaces. Fourier series. Spectrum of bounded and compact linear operators. Linear differential operators and Green's functions. Distributions. Fourier transform. Measure theory. Lp and Sobolev spaces. Differential calculus and variational methods.
MAT 202
Functional Analysis
MAT 201A;  MAT 201B.
Hahn-Banach, Open mapping, Closed graph, Banach-Steinhaus, and Krein-Milman. Subspaces and quotient spaces. Projections. Weak and weak-star topologies. Compact and adjoint operators in Banach spaces. Fredholm theory. Functions of operators. Spectral theory of self-adjoint operators. 
MAT 205
Complex Analysis
MAT 185A;  Or equivalent to MAT 185A, or consent of instructor.
Analytic continuation, Riemann surfaces, conformal mappings, Riemann mapping theorem, entire functions, special functions, elliptic functions. 
MAT 205A
Complex Analysis
MAT 185A;  Or equivalent to MAT 185A, or consent of instructor.
Cauchy's theorem, Cauchy's integral formulas, meromorphic functions, complex logarithm, entire functions, Weierstrass infinite product formula, the gamma and zeta functions, and prime number theorem. 
MAT 205B
Complex Analysis
MAT 205A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Conformal mappings, the Schwarz lemma, analytic automorphisms, the Riemann mapping theorem, elliptic functions, Eisenstein series, the Jacobi theta functions, asymptotics, Bessel functions, the Airy function, topics on special functions and Riemann surfaces. 
MAT 206
Measure Theory
MAT 125B.
Introduction to measure theory.  The study of lengths, surface areas, and volumes in general spaces, as related to integration theory.
MAT 207A
Methods of Applied Mathematics
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Ordinary differential equations and dynamical systems. Variational principles. Eigenfunctions, integral equations and Green's functions. Complex analysis and contour integration. Laplace's equation. Diffusion equations. Wave phenomena. Dimensional analysis and scaling. Asymptotic expansions and perturbation theory. Stochastic processes and Brownian motion.
MAT 207B
Methods of Applied Mathematics
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Ordinary differential equations and dynamical systems. Variational principles. Eigenfunctions, integral equations and Green's functions. Complex analysis and contour integration. Laplace's equation.  Diffusion equations. Wave phenomena. Dimensional analysis and scaling. Asymptotic expansions and perturbation theory. Stochastic processes and Brownian motion.
MAT 207C
Methods of Applied Mathematics
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Ordinary differential equations and dynamical systems. Variational principles. Eigenfunctions, integral equations and Green's functions. Complex analysis and contour integration. Laplace's equation. Diffusion equations. Wave phenomena. Dimensional analysis and scaling. Asymptotic expansions and perturbation theory. Stochastic processes and Brownian motion.
MAT 215A
Topology
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Fundamental group and covering space theory. Homology and cohomology. Manifolds and duality. CW complexes. Fixed point theorems.
MAT 215B
Topology
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Fundamental group and covering space theory. Homology and cohomology. Manifolds and duality. CW complexes. Fixed point theorems. 
MAT 215C
Topology
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Fundamental group and covering space theory. Homology and cohomology. Manifolds and duality. CW complexes. Fixed point theorems. 
MAT 216
Geometric Topology
MAT 215A.
Topology of two- and three-dimensional manifolds. Surfaces and their diffeomorphisms. Dehn twists. Heegaard surfaces. Theory of 3-dimensional manifolds. Knots and knot theory. Hyperbolic manifolds and geometric structures.
MAT 218A
Partial Differential Equations
MAT 201A;  MAT 201B;  MAT 201C;  or Consent of Instructor.
Year-long sequence on PDEs which covers linear transport, Laplace, heat, and wave equations, maximum principles, method of characteristics, Sobelev and Hlder space theory, weak derivatives, semilinear, quasilinear, and fully nonlinear elliptic/parabolic equations, nonlinear hyperbolic equations, and compensated compactness.
MAT 218B
Partial Differential Equations
MAT 218A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Year-long sequence on PDEs which covers linear transport, Laplace, heat, and wave equations, maximum principles, method of characteristics, Sobelev and Hlder space theory, weak derivatives, semilinear, quasilinear, and fully nonlinear elliptic/parabolic equations, nonlinear hyperbolic equations, and compensated compactness.
MAT 218C
Partial Differential Equations
MAT 218B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Year-long sequence on PDEs which covers linear transport, Laplace, heat, and wave equations, maximum principles, method of characteristics, Sobelev and Hlder space theory, weak derivatives, semilinear, quasilinear, and fully nonlinear elliptic/parabolic equations, nonlinear hyperbolic equations, and compensated compactness.
MAT 221A
Mathematical Fluid Dynamics
MAT 118B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Kinematics and dynamics of fluids. The Euler and Navier-Stokes equations. Vorticity dynamics. Irrotational flow. Low Reynolds number flows and the Stokes equations. High Reynolds number flows and boundary layers. Compressible fluids. Shock waves. 
MAT 221B
Mathematical Fluid Dynamics
MAT 118B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Kinematics and dynamics of fluids. The Euler and Navier-Stokes equations. Vorticity dynamics. Irrotational flow. Low Reynolds number flows and the Stokes equations. High Reynolds number flows and boundary layers. Compressible fluids. Shock waves. 
MAT 226A
Numerical Methods: Fundamentals
MAT 128A;  MAT 128B;  Or equivalent, or consent of instructor; familiarity with some programming language.
Fundamental principles and methods in numerical analysis, including the concepts of stability of algorithms and conditioning of numerical problems, numerical methods for interpolation and integration, eigenvalue problems, singular value decomposition and its applications.
MAT 226B
Numerical Methods: Large-Scale Matrix Computations
MAT 167;  Or equivalent, or consent of instructor; familiarity with some programming language.
Numerical methods for large-scale matrix computations, including direct and iterative methods for the solution of linear systems, the computation of eigenvalues and singular values, the solution of least-squares problems, matrix compression, methods for the solution of linear programs.
MAT 226C
Numerical Methods: Ordinary Differential Equations
MAT 022B;  Or equivalent, or consent of instructor; familiarity with some programming language.
Numerical methods for the solution of ordinary differential equations, including methods for initial-value problems and two-point boundary-value problems, theory of and methods for differential algebraic equations, dimension reduction of large-scale dynamical systems. 
MAT 227
Mathematical Biology
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Nonlinear ordinary and partial differential equations and stochastic processes of cell and molecular biology. Scaling, qualitative, and numerical analysis of mathematical models. Applications to nerve impulse, chemotaxis, muscle contraction, and morphogenesis.
MAT 228A
Numerical Solution of Differential Equations
MAT 128C.
Numerical solutions of initial-value, eigenvalue and boundary-value problems for ordinary differential equations. Numerical solution of parabolic and hyperbolic partial differential equations.
MAT 228B
Numerical Solution of Differential Equations
MAT 128C.
Numerical solutions of initial-value, eigenvalue and boundary-value problems for ordinary differential equations. Numerical solution of parabolic and hyperbolic partial differential equations.
MAT 228C
Numerical Solution of Differential Equations
MAT 128C.
Numerical solutions of initial-value, eigenvalue and boundary-value problems for ordinary differential equations. Numerical solution of parabolic and hyperbolic partial differential equations.
MAT 235A
Probability Theory
MAT 125B;  (MAT 135A or STA 131A);  or Consent of Instructor.
Measure-theoretic foundations, abstract integration, independence, laws of large numbers, characteristic functions, central limit theorems. Weak convergence in metric spaces, Brownian motion, invariance principle. Conditional expectation. Topics selected from: martingales, Markov chains, ergodic theory.
MAT 235B
Probability Theory
MAT 235A or STA 235A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Measure-theoretic foundations, abstract integration, independence, laws of large numbers, characteristic functions, central limit theorems. Weak convergence in metric spaces, Brownian motion, invariance principle. Conditional expectation. Topics selected from: martingales, Markov chains, ergodic theory.
MAT 235C
Probability Theory
MAT 235B or STA 235B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Measure-theoretic foundations, abstract integration, independence, laws of large numbers, characteristic functions, central limit theorems. Weak convergence in metric spaces, Brownian motion, invariance principle. Conditional expectation. Topics selected from: martingales, Markov chains, ergodic theory.
MAT 236A
Stochastic Dynamics & Applications
MAT 201C or (MAT 235B or STA 235B);  MAT 235A, MAT 235B, MAT 235C/STA 235A, STA 235B, STA 235C recommended.
Stochastic processes, Brownian motion, Stochastic integration, martingales, stochastic differential equations. Diffusions, connections with partial differential equations, mathematical finance.
MAT 236B
Stochastic Dynamics & Applications
MAT 201C or (MAT 235B or STA 235B);  MAT 235A, MAT 235B, MAT 235C/STA 235A, STA 235B, STA 235C recommended.
Stochastic processes, Brownian motion, Stochastic integration, martingales, stochastic differential equations. Diffusions, connections with partial differential equations, mathematical finance.
MAT 239
Differential Topology
MAT 201A;  or Consent of Instructor.  Vector calculus, point-set topology; MAT 250A & MAT 250B highly recommended.
Topics include: differentiable manifolds, vector fields, transversality, Sard's theorem, examples of differentiable manifolds; orientation, intersection theory, index of vector fields; differential forms, integration, Stokes' theorm, deRham cohomology; Morse functions, Morse lemma, index of critical points.
MAT 240A
Differential Geometry
MAT 201A;  MAT 239;  MAT 250A & MAT 250B highly recommended; intended primarily for second-year graduate students.
Riemannian metrics, connections, geodesics, Gauss lemma, convex neighborhoods, curvature tensor, Ricci and scalar curvature, connections and curvature on vector bundles. 
MAT 240B
Differential Geometry
MAT 240A;  Intended primarily for second-year graduate students.
Jacobi fields, conjugate points, completeness, Hopf-Rinow theorem, Cartan-Hadamard theorem, energy, variation theorems and their applications, Rauch comparison theorem and its applications.
MAT 245
Enumerative Combinatorics
MAT 145;  MAT 150; or the equivalent, or consent of instructor.
Introduction to modern combinatorics and its applications. Emphasis on enumerative aspects of combinatorial theory.
MAT 246
Algebraic Combinatorics
MAT 245;  or Consent of Instructor.
Algebraic and geometric aspects of combinatorics.  The use of structures such as groups, polytopes, rings, and simplicial complexes to solve combinatorial problems.
MAT 248A
Algebraic Geometry
MAT 250A;  MAT 250B;  MAT 250C.
Affine varieties and radical ideals. Projective varieties. Abstract varieties. Morphisms and rational maps. Smoothness. Algebraic curves and the Riemann-Roch theorem. Special topics.
MAT 248B
Algebraic Geometry
MAT 248A.
Complex varieties and the analytic topology. Sheaves and schemes. 
MAT 249
Problem-Solving in Algebra
MAT 250A (can be concurrent);  MAT 250B (can be concurrent).
Problem-solving in graduate algebra: groups, rings, modules, matrices, tensor products, representations, Galois theory, ring extensions, commutative algebra and homological algebra. 
MAT 249B
Problem-Solving in Algebra
MAT 250A;  MAT 250B.
Problem-solving in graduate algebra: groups, rings, modules, matrices, tensor products, representations, Galois theory, ring extensions, commutative algebra and homological algebra.
MAT 249B
Problem-Solving in Algebra
MAT 250A;  MAT 250B.
Problem-solving in graduate algebra: groups, rings, modules, matrices, tensor products, representations, Galois theory, ring extensions, commutative algebra and homological algebra.
MAT 250A
Algebra
Graduate standing in mathematics or consent of instructor.
Group and rings. Sylow theorems, abelian groups, Jordan-Holder theorem. Rings, unique factorization. Algebras, and modules. Fields and vector spaces over fields. Field extensions. Commutative rings. Representation theory and its applications.
MAT 250B
Algebra
Graduate standing in mathematics or consent of instructor.
Group and rings. Sylow theorems, abelian groups, Jordan-Holder theorem. Rings, unique factorization. Algebras, and modules. Fields and vector spaces over fields. Field extensions. Commutative rings. Representation theory and its applications.
MAT 250C
Algebra
Graduate standing in mathematics or consent of instructor.
Group and rings. Sylow theorems, abelian groups, Jordan-Holder theorem. Rings, unique factorization. Algebras, and modules. Fields and vector spaces over fields. Field extensions. Commutative rings. Representation theory and its applications.
MAT 258A
Numerical Optimization
MAT 025;  MAT 167.
Numerical methods for infinite dimensional optimization problems.  Newton and Quasi-Newton methods, linear and sequential quadratic programming, barrier methods; large-scale optimization; theory of approximations; infinite and semi-infinite programming; applications to optimal control, stochastic optimization and distributed systems.
MAT 258B
Discrete & Mixed-Integer Optimization
MAT 025;  MAT 167;  or Consent of Instructor.
Combinatorial, integer, and mixed-integer linear optimization problems. Ideal and strong formulations, cutting planes, branch and cut, decomposition methods.
MAT 261A
Lie Groups & Their Representations
MAT 215A;  MAT 240A;  MAT 250A;  MAT 250B;  Or the equivalent, or consent of instructor.
Lie groups and Lie algebras. Classification of semi-simple Lie groups. Classical and compact Lie groups. Representations of Lie groups and Lie algebras. Root systems, weights, Weil character formula. Kac-Moody and Virasoro algebras. Applications.
MAT 261B
Lie Groups & Their Representations
MAT 215A;  MAT 240A;  MAT 250A;  MAT 250B;  Or the equivalent, or consent of instructor.
Lie groups and Lie algebras. Classification of semi-simple Lie groups. Classical and compact Lie groups. Representations of Lie groups and Lie algebras. Root systems, weights, Weil character formula. Kac-Moody and Virasoro algebras. Applications.
MAT 265
Mathematical Quantum Mechanics
MAT 201; or Consent of Instructor.
Mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics: the Hilbert space and Operator Algebra formulations; the Schrdinger and Heisenberg equations, symmetry in quantum mechanics, basics of spectral theory and perturbation theory. Applications to atoms and molecules. The Dirac equation.
MAT 266
Mathematical Statistical Mechanics & Quantum Field Theory
MAT 265;  or Consent of Instructor.
Mathematical principles of statistical mechanics and quantum field theory. Topics include classical and quantum lattice systems, variational principles, spontaneous symmetry breaking and phase transitions, second quantization and Fock space, and fundamentals
MAT 271
Applied & Computational Harmonic Analysis
(MAT 125B or MAT 201C);  (MAT 128B or MAT 167);  MAT 129;  Or the equivalent, or consent of instructor.
Introduction to mathematical basic building blocks (wavelets, local Fourier basis, and their relatives) useful for diverse fields (signal and image processing, numerical analysis, and statistics). Emphasis on the connection between the continuum and the discrete worlds.
MAT 280
Topics in Pure & Applied Mathematics
Graduate standing.
Special topics in various fields of pure and applied mathematics. Topics selected based on the mutual interests of students and faculty.
MAT 301A
Mathematics Teaching Practicum
MAT 302A (can be concurrent);  MAT 303A (can be concurrent);  MAT 302A & MAT 303A required concurrently or consent of instructor.
Specialist training in mathematics teaching.  Teaching, training, and cross observing classes taught using large group Socratic techniques, small group guided inquiry experiences, and/or other approaches to teaching at various grade levels. Required for advanced degrees in mathematics education.
MAT 301B
Mathematics Teaching Practicum
MAT 302B (can be concurrent);  MAT 303B (can be concurrent);  MAT 302B & MAT 303B required concurrently or consent of instructor.
Specialist training in mathematics teaching. Teaching, training, and cross observing classes taught using large group Socratic techniques, small group guided inquiry experiences, and/or other approaches to teaching at various grade levels. Required for advanced degrees in mathematics education.
MAT 301C
Mathematics Teaching Practicum
MAT 302C (can be concurrent);  MAT 303B (can be concurrent);  MAT 302C & MAT 303C required concurrently or consent of instructor.
Specialist training in mathematics teaching. Teaching, training, and cross observing classes taught using large group Socratic techniques, small group guided inquiry experiences, and/or other approaches to teaching at various grade levels. Required for advanced degrees in mathematics education.
MAT 302A
Curriculum Development in Mathematics
MAT 303A (can be concurrent);  MAT 303A required concurrently or consent of instructor.
Mathematics curriculum development for all grade levels. Required for advanced degrees in mathematics education.
MAT 302B
Curriculum Development in Mathematics
MAT 303B (can be concurrent);  MAT 303B required concurrently or consent of instructor.
Mathematics curriculum development for all grade levels. Required for advanced degrees in mathematics education.
MAT 302C
Curriculum Development in Mathematics
MAT 303C (can be concurrent);  MAT 303C required concurrently or consent of instructor.
Mathematics curriculum development for all grade levels. Required for advanced degrees in mathematics education.
MAT 303A
Mathematics Pedagogy
MAT 302A (can be concurrent) or MAT 210AL (can be concurrent);  MAT 302A or MAT 210AL required concurrently or consent of instructor.
An investigation of the interplay of mathematical pedagogy and mathematical content, including a historical survey of past and present methods in view of some of the influences that shaped their development.
MAT 303B
Mathematics Pedagogy
MAT 302B (can be concurrent) or MAT 210BL (can be concurrent);  MAT 302A or MAT 210AL required concurrently or consent of instructor.
An investigation of the interplay of mathematical pedagogy and mathematical content, including a historical survey of past and present methods in view of some of the influences that shaped their development.
MAT 303C
Mathematics Pedagogy
MAT 302C (can be concurrent) or MAT 210CL (can be concurrent);  MAT 302C or MAT 210CL required concurrently or consent of instructor.
An investigation of the interplay of mathematical pedagogy and mathematical content, including a historical survey of past and present methods in view of some of the influences that shaped their development.
MAT 390
Teaching Assistantship Training
Graduate standing in the Department of Mathematics.
Experience in methods of assisting and teaching of mathematics at the university level. Includes discussion of lecturing techniques, running discussion sessions, holding office hours, preparing and grading of examinations, student-teacher interaction, and related topics. Required of departmental teaching assistants. 
MCB 099
Special Study
Consent of Instructor.

MCB 110Y
iBioseminars in Cell & Molecular Biology
BIS 101;  BIS 102;  (BIS 103 or BIS 105);  BIS 104.
Hybrid course in Cellular & Molecular Biology for senior level (1) Biochemistry/Molecular Biology; (2) Genetics; or (3) Cell Biology majors. Face-to-face instruction combined with online lectures available at iBioseminars website delivered by leading researchers in Cellular & Molecular Biology.
MCB 120
Molecular Biology & Biochemistry Laboratory Associated Lecture
BIS 102;  or Consent of Instructor.Pass One restricted to upper division Biochemistry & Molecular Biology majors; concurrent enrollment in MCB 120L required; on-time attendance for first lecture is mandatory. 
Introduction to laboratory methods and procedures employed in studying molecular biology and biochemical processes. Lecture component for MCB 120L.
MCB 120L
Molecular Biology & Biochemistry Laboratory
BIS 102;  or Consent of Instructor.  Must be taken concurrently with MCB 120.Pass One restricted to upper division Biochemistry & Molecular Biology majors; concurrent enrollment in MCB 120 required; on-time attendance for first lab is mandatory. 
Introduction to laboratory methods and procedures employed in studying molecular biology and biochemical processes. Designed for students who need experience in use of molecular biology and biochemical techniques as research and analytical tools. 
MCB 121
Advanced Molecular Biology
BIS 101;  (BIS 102 (can be concurrent) or BIS 105 (can be concurrent) or ABI 102 (can be concurrent));  BIS 102 or BIS 105 or ABI 102 can be concurrent although prior completion is recommended.
Structure, expression, and regulation of eukaryotic genes. Chromosome structure and replication; gene structure, transcription, and RNA processing; protein synthesis and translation control; development, immune system, and oncogenes.  
MCB 123
Behavior & Analysis of Enzyme & Receptor Systems
BIS 103.
Introduction to the principles of enzyme kinetics and receptor-ligand interactions with emphasis on metabolic regulation and data analysis. Topics include simultaneous equilibria, chemical and steady-state kinetics, allosteric enzymes, mulitreactant systems, enzyme assays, membrane transport and computer-assisted simulations and analyses.
MCB 124
Macromolecular Structure & Function
BIS 103;  CHE 118C.
An in-depth investigation into protein and nucleic acid structure and thermodynamics and how these properties influence their biological functions. Key examples of important functional classes of these molecules will be examined.
MCB 126
Plant Biochemistry
BIS 103 or BIS 105.
The biochemistry of important plant processes and metabolic pathways. Discussion of methods used to understand plant processes, including use of transgenic plants.
MCB 138
Undergraduate Seminar in Biochemistry
BIS 103.
Discussion of the historical developments of modern biochemistry or current major research problems.
MCB 139
Undergraduate Seminar in Biochemistry
BIS 103.
Discussion of the historical developments of modern biochemistry or current major research problems. 
MCB 140
Cell Biology Laboratory Associated Lecture
BIS 104;  or Consent of Instructor.Pass One restricted to upper division Cell Biology majors; concurrent enrollment in MCB 140L required; on-time attendance for first lecture is mandatory. 
Lectures illustrating the principles of cell biology with emphasis on light microscopy. Accompanies MCB 140L.
MCB 140L
Cell Biology Laboratory
BIS 104 (can be concurrent).
Exercises illustrating the principles of cell biology with emphasis on light microscopy.
MCB 142
Advanced Cell Biology: Contractile & Motile Systems
BIS 102;  BIS 104 (can be concurrent);  MAT 016B.
Advanced cell biology with emphasis on molecular, biophysical and cellular properties of contractile and motile systems.
MCB 143
Cell & Molecular Biophysics
BIS 101;  BIS 102;  BIS 103;  BIS 104.
Physical chemical principles by which molecules form living, moving, reproducing cells.  Physical nature of cytoplasm; molecular structure/bonding in macromolecules, macromolecular assemblies and protein machines.  Physical techniques and modeling of cytoskeletal polymer-motor dynamics and function during intracellular transport, mitosis and motility.
MCB 144
Mechanisms of Cell Division
BIS 101;  BIS 102;  BIS 104.
The molecules and mechanisms that allow eukaryotic cells to coordinate cell growth, DNA replication, segregation of chromosomes and cell division.
MCB 145
Assembly & Function of Cell Signaling Machinery
BIS 101;  BIS 102;  BIS 104.
Molecular basis of cell signaling, including positioning of cellular machinery, components of various signaling pathways, and downstream effects of signaling on cell adhesion, cell differentiation, and programmed cell death.
MCB 148
Undergraduate Seminar in Cell Biology
Upper division standing in the biological sciences or a related discipline.
Student reports on current topics in cell biology with emphasis on integration of concepts, synthesis, and state-of-the-art research approaches. Reviews of literature and reports of undergraduate research may be included.
MCB 150
Developmental Biology
BIS 101.
Analysis of the mechanistic basis for animal development with a focus on experimental evidence and the relevant fundamental experimental strategies. Fertilization and early development, morphogenesis and patterning, cell differentiation, regulation of cell proliferation and tissue growth.
MCB 158
Undergraduate Seminar in Developmental Biology
Upper division standing in the biological sciences or a related discipline.
Student reports on current topics in cell biology with emphasis on integration of concepts, synthesis, and state-of-the-art research approaches. Reviews of literature and reports of undergraduate research may be included.
MCB 160
Genetics Laboratory Associated Lecture
BIS 101;  or Consent of Instructor.Pass One restricted to upper division Genetics and Genomics majors; concurrent enrollment in MCB 160L required; on-time attendance for first lecture is mandatory. 
Lecture instruction in the theoretical basis of laboratory techniques in transmission and molecular genetics, discussion of lab results and experiment interpretation.
MCB 160L
Principles of Genetics Laboratory
BIS 101.
Laboratory work in basic and molecular genetics including gene mapping, isolation and characterization of mutants in eukaryotic model systems, reverse genetics, gel electrophoresis, recombinant DNA techniques, and PCR. 
MCB 162
Human Genetics & Genomics
BIS 101.
Human genome and genetic variation in human populations, molecular and genomic approaches in the practice of human genetics, epigenetic gene regulation, personal genetics and genomic medicine.
MCB 163
Developmental Genetics
MCB 121 (can be concurrent).
Current aspects of developmental genetics. Historical background and current genetic approaches to the study of development of higher animals.
MCB 164
Advanced Eukaryotic Genetics
MCB 121.
Five basic operations of genetic analysis: mutation, segregation, recombination, complementation, and regulation. Emphasis on the theory and practice of isolating and analyzing mutations, as well as understanding mechanisms underlying both Mendelian and epigenetic inheritance. 
MCB 178
Undergraduate Seminar in Molecular Genetics
BIS 101;  MCB 121 (can be concurrent);  Upper division standing, and completion or concurrent enrollment in MCB 121.
Discussion of current topics in molecular genetics to show advanced applications of basic principles and to highlight professional careeropportunities. 
MCB 182
Principles of Genomics
BIS 101.
Fundamentals of genomics, including structural genomics, functional genomics, proteomics, and bioinformatics,  focusing on the impact of these disciplines on research in the biological sciences. Social impacts of genomic research.
MCB 190C
Undergraduate Research Conference
MCB 193 (can be concurrent) or MCB 199 (can be concurrent);  and Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing; MCB 193 or MCB 199 required concurrently.
Presentation and discussion of current research by faculty and students.
MCB 191
Introduction to Research
BIS 102 (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.
Various topics in molecular and cellular biology including biochemistry, genetics, and cell biology will be discussed, along with ways undergraduates can participate in research projects of faculty members.
MCB 192
Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of 84 units.
Technical and/or practical experience on and off campus, supervised by a member of the Section of Molecular and Cellular Biology faculty.
MCB 193
Advanced Research
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing; completion of an upper division Molecular & Cellular Biology (MCB) laboratory course.
Research project carried out under the supervision of a faculty sponsor. Discussion and analysis of results and proposed experiments on a weekly basis with faculty sponsor. May include presentation of a seminar to a research group.
MCB 194
Thesis Research
Consent of Instructor.  6 units of MCB 193 and/or MCB 199 with faculty director; senior standing.
Continuation of an intensive, individual laboratory research project in biochemistry, genetics, or cell biology culminating with the presentation of the work in a written thesis and in a seminar.
MCB 194H
Research Honors
Consent of Instructor.  6 units of MCB 193 and/or MCB 199 with faculty director; senior standing; GPA of at least 3.250.
Honors project. Continuation of an intensive, individual laboratory research project in biochemistry, genetics, or cell biology culminating with the presentation of the work in a written thesis and in a seminar.
MCB 197T
Tutoring in Molecular & Cellular Biology
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing, completion of course to be tutored.
Assisting the instructor in one of the section's regular courses by tutoring individual or small groups of students in a laboratory, in voluntary discussion groups, or other voluntary course activities.
MCB 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.
MCB 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

MCB 248
Seminar in Cell Biology
Consent of Instructor.
Discussion of recent literature on the physical and chemical aspects of organization and function of living systems, topics of current interest in ultrastructure and function of cells. Organizational and functionalproperties of the molecular and cellular levels of biological systems.
MCB 258
Seminar in Development
Consent of Instructor.
Reports and discussion on embryology, morphogenesis, and developmental mechanisms.
MCB 259
Literature in Developmental Biology
Consent of Instructor.
Critical presentation and analysis of recent journal articles in developmental biology.
MCB 282
Biotechnology Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.Open only to students participating in the Designated Emphasis in Biotechnology program.
Research at a biotechnology company or interdisciplinary cross-college lab for a minimum of 3 months as part of the Designated Emphasis in Biotechnology Program.
MCB 290C
Research Conference
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Presentations and critical discussions of faculty and graduate student research in molecular and cellular biology including biochemistry, genetics, and cell biology.
MCB 291
Current Progress in Molecular & Cellular Biology
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Seminars presented by guest lecturers on subject of their own research activities.
MCB 295
Literature in Molecular & Cellular Biology
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Critical reading and evaluation of current literature in molecular and cellular biology disciplines. Papers presented and discussed in detail.
MCB 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

MCB 390
Methods of Teaching
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Practical experience in the methods and problems of teaching biochemistry/genetics/cell biology. Includes analysis of texts and
MCN 260
Nutrition During Pregnancy
Acceptance into the Master of Advanced Studies in Maternal and Child Nutrition; other students by consent of instructor.Open to Graduate standing.
Overview of the anatomical, physiological and biochemical changes that occur during pregnancy and early development. Discussion and evaluation of nutritional/lifestyle factors associated with pregnancy outcomes and nutrition programs/interventions for pregnant women. 
MCN 261
Lactation & Infant Nutrition
MCN 260;  Graduate standing.Restricted to students enrolled in the MAS program; other graduate students by consent of instructor.  
Overview of the physiological and biochemical processes underlying human lactation and nutritional needs of both mother and infant. Development of skills in assessment, nutrition counseling, education and support of new mothers and their families.
MCN 262
Child & Adolescent Nutrition
MCN 261;  Graduate Standing.Restricted to students enrolled in the MAS program; other graduate students by consent of instructor. 
Relationships among nutrition, growth, and development during childhood and adolescence. Nutritional assessment for normal and high risk groups; psychological, social, and economic factors contributing to nutritional status. Nutritional needs and interventions for special groups, including obese children/adolescents, athletes, and eating disordered. 
MCN 263
Applied Research Methods in Maternal & Child Nutrition
Graduate standing.Restricted to students enrolled in the MAS program; other graduate students by consent of instructor.
Application of epidemiological principles to the study of maternal and child nutrition. Topics include quantitative & qualitative study procedures, including study design, data collection, and related analytical techniques.
MCN 264A
Current Topics in Maternal & Child Nutrition: Principles of Adult Education
Graduate standing.Restricted to students enrolled in the MAS program; other graduate students by consent of instructor.
Current scientific literature related to Maternal & Child Nutrition in adult education settings. Topics include methods and theories of adult education and critical thinking skills related to research evaluation.
MCN 264B
Current Topics in Maternal & Child Nutrition: Epidemiology & Evidence-Based Practice
Graduate standing.Restricted to students enrolled in the MAS program; other graduate students by consent of instructor.
Current scientific literature related to Maternal & Child Nutrition. Topics include epidemiology, evidence-based practice, breastfeeding promotion, and nutritional assessment of populations.
MCN 264C
Current Topics in Maternal & Child Nutrition: Public Policy Development & Implementation
Graduate standing.Restricted to students enrolled in the MAS program; other graduate students by consent of instructor.
Current scientific literature related to Maternal & Child Nutrition. Topics include nutrition surveillance and monitoring, as well as public policy development and implementation.
MCP 200L
Animal Cell Culture Laboratory
Courses in undergraduate Biochemistry, Cell Biology, or General Physiology, or consent of instructor.
Techniques of cell culture, with emphases on cell physiology and the actions of drugs and toxicants on cultured somatic cells. Design, performance and interpretation of experiments with animal cells in vitro.
MCP 210A
Advanced Physiology
Physiology Ph.D. program or consent of instructor.MCP 210A (or HPH 210A) is a required core course for the Molecular, Cellular, & Integrative Physiology graduate group; course contains thermodynamics discussions and requires substantial math and physics background in order to succeed; approval for registering from Co-IRs is required to get CRN.
Advanced course on fundamental principles of cell physiology, transport physiology, signal transduction, physiology of excitable cells, and muscle physiology.
MCP 210B
Advanced Physiology
Physiology Ph.D. program, or consent of instructor.
Advanced course in general principles of physiology, surveying homeostasis, cellular and selected topis, and neurophysiology.
MCP 210C
Advanced Physiology
Doctoral student in the Molecular, Cellular, & Integrative Physiology graduate group, or consent of instructor.
Graduate level instruction in the general principles of physiology and the neural and humoral control of the cardiovascular, renal, respiratory, gastrointestinal, sensory, musculoskeletal, and reproductive systems. 
MCP 219
Muscle Growth & Development
BIS 103;  (BIS 104 or MCB 150);  or Consent of Instructor.
Integration of growth and development of skeletal muscle; morphology, biochemistry, neural control mechanisms, circulatory and nutritional factors. Prenatal and neonatal differentiation of fiber types. Experimental and hereditary myopathies.
MCP 220
General & Comparative Physiology of Reproduction
BIS 101;  BIS 103;  NPB 110; NPB 110L.
Basic phenomena of sexual and asexual reproduction and comparisons of processes in a wide variety of animals; gamete formation, structure, and metabolism; fertilization; neuroendocrine mechanisms in maturation and reproductive cycles; behavioral aspects.
MCP 222
Mammalian Gametogenesis & Fertilization 
NPB 121;  Or the equivalent.
Emphasizes our current understanding of events in mammalian gametogenesis and the fertilization process. Published results, conclusions drawn from these results, and their contribution to our understanding are discussed.
MCP 230
Advanced Endocrinology 
NPB 130;  Or the equivalent, and graduate standing.
Focus on timely topic of endrocrine research. Critical review of current literature and discussion of future research strategies in the area.
MCP 231
Neuroendocrinology
NPB 130;  or the equivalent course in endocrinology; NPB 110 or the equivalent course in systemic physiology.
Neural-endocrine interactions; neural regulation of the endocrine system, especially in relation to reproduction; the role of hormones and growth factors in sexual differentiation of the brain.
MCP 234
Current Topics in Neurotoxicology
Core courses in one of the following graduate programs: Pharmacology & Toxicology (PTX), Agricultural & Environmental Chemistry (AGC), Biochemistry & Molecular Biology (BMB), Cell & Developmental Biology (CDB), Immunology (IMM) , Molecular Cellular & Integrative Physiology (MCP) or Neuroscience (NSC).Restricted to upper level undergraduate students must obtain permission from the course coordinator. 
General principles of neurotoxicology, the cell and molecular mechanisms and health impacts of specific neurotoxicants and the contribution of neurotoxic compounds to complex neurodevelopmental disorders and neurodegenerative diseases.
MCP 242
Biological Rhythms
NPB 110 or the equivalent.
General aspects and basic mechanisms of biological rhythms; the importance of rhythm desynchronization in areas of pharmacology and space medicine; telemetry; mathematical methods; chronometry; daily, reproductive, and annual periods; shift-work, jet lag and sleep disorders. 
MCP 255
Physiology of the Stress Response
Graduate Student Status.
Definition of Stress; Physiological mechanisms of adaptation to stress; Hormonal control of the systemic stress response; Mechanisms of the cellular stress response; Discussion of current trends in stress physiology and current methods for studying the stress response;
MCP 261A
Topics in Vision: Eyes & Retinal Mechanisms
NPB 100 or NPB 112;  Or the equivalent; graduate standing.
Structure and function of the visual system, with emphasis on the eye and retina, including optics, anatomy, transduction, retinal synapses, adaptation, and parallel processing.
MCP 261B
Topics in Vision: Systems, Psychophysics, Computational Models
Consent of Instructor.  MCP 261A recommended.
Functions of the central visual pathways and their underlying mechanisms. Recent research on aspects of anatomy, biochemistry, electrophysiology, psychophysics, development, and genetics of the visual system.
MCP 261C
Topics in Vision: Clinical Vision Science
MCP 261A;  MCP 261B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Causes and mechanistic bases of major blinding diseases. Recent research on aspects of anatomy, biochemistry, electrophysiology , psychophysics, development, and genetics of the visual system related to disease.
MCP 275
Neurohumoral Regulatory Mechanisms of Thermogenesis
BIS 104;  BIS 102;  and Consent of Instructor.  Or equivalent courses.
Designed for graduate and advanced undergraduate students, examines thermogenic systems in homeotherms (primarily mammals) with respect to regulation (hormonal and central nervous control) and effector mechanisms (basis of heat generation at the target cell).
MCP 290C
Research Conference in Physiology 
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
 Presentation and discussion of faculty and graduate student research in physiology.
MCP 291B
Seminar in Cellular Mechanisms of Adaptation 
BIS 103;  NPB 100B; Consent of Instructor.
Review and evaluation of current literature and research in cellular adaptations to the environment. 
MCP 293
Current Progress in Physiology 
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Seminars presented by guest lecturers describing their current research activities.
MCP 300A
Pedagogical Aspects of Physiology in Higher Education 
Meet qualifications for teaching assistant in physiology.
Participation as a teaching assistant for one quarter in a designated physiology course. Instruction in methods of leading discussion groups, leading laboratory sections, writing and grading quizzes, operation and use of laboratory equipment, and reading and grading laboratory reports. Meets teaching requirements for Ph.D. program in Physiology.
MCP 300B
Pedagogical Aspects of Physiology in Higher Education 
Meet qualifications for teaching assistant in physiology.
Participation as a teaching assistant for one quarter in a designated physiology course. Instruction in methods of leading discussion groups, leading laboratory sections, writing and grading quizzes, operation and use of laboratory equipment, and reading and grading laboratory reports. Meets teaching requirements for Ph.D. program in Physiology.
MCP 390
The Teaching of Physiology 
Consent of Instructor.  Teaching Assistant assignment to a physiology lecture course.
Practical experience in methods and problems of teaching physiology lecture courses. May include analyses of texts and supporting material, discussion of teaching techniques, preparing for and conducting discussion sessions, and formulation of topics and questions for examinations under supervision of instructor.
MDS 099
Special Study in Medicine for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.
Participate in research projects relating to medicine with faculty in the School of Medicine.
MDS 192
Medical Education Internship for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.  Competency with computers.Enrollment dependent on availability of intern positions. 
Participate in projects related to curriculum development in support of curriculum for M.D. degree. Gain work experience and appreciationfor innovative approaches to learning in basic and clinical sciences of medical education. 
MDS 400
Summer Pre-Matriculation Program
Consent of Instructor.
Two-week program provides students from diverse backgrounds an early introduction to learning skills that will facilitate success in medical school. 
MDS 401
Applications of Computers to Medical Practice
Enrollment in medical school.
Proficiency in computer applications relative to practice of medicine, with emphasis on email, literature searching, file transfer, and hospital information services. Given online, at home or in lab; time and place determined by student.
MDS 402
Clinical & Cultural Spanish
Consent of Instructor.
Medical students, nursing students and physician assistants students who are fluent Spanish speakers will learn a comprehensive set of medical vocabulary and cultural aspects related to the treatment of Spanish speaking patients.
MDS 402
Clinical & Cultural Spanish
Consent of Instructor.
Fluent Spanish-speakering medical students, nursing students and physician assistants students learn a comprehensive set of medical vocabulary and cultural aspects related to the treatment of Spanish speaking patients.
MDS 406
Endocrinology, Nutrition, Reproduction & Genetics
BCM 410A;  HPH 400;  and Consent of Instructor.Restricted to Medical students only.
Basic and pathophysiologic processes involved in human reproductive and endocrine control systems, nutritional regulation, and foundational genetics across the lifespan. Integrate information across these systems and use clinical reasoning process to identify and understand relevant perturbations and diseases.
MDS 411
Doctoring 1
Consent of Instructor.
Small group training in patient communication, interviewing techniques, physical exam and clinical identification. Outpatient clinical experiences and didactic presentations also included.
MDS 411KA
ACE-PC Program Doctoring 1
Consent of Instructor.
Small case-based learning groups with training in patient communication and interviewing techniques clinical identification and problem solving applications of social psychological cultural bioethical and basic science concepts to patient case scenarios outpatient clinical experiences and didactic presentations.
MDS 411KB
ACE-PC Program Doctoring 1
Consent of Instructor.
Application of multidisciplinary basic, social and clinical science to clinical cases in small groups. History, physical examination with preceptors. Didactics in epidemiology, ethics, sexuality and clinical reasoning. Evaluation of professional competencies, attitudes and skills needed in the practice of medicine.
MDS 415A
Population Health & Evidence-Based Medicine
Consent of Instructor.
Introduces the fundamental concepts and tools of population health, evidence-based medicine, and system science.
MDS 415C
Population Health & System Science
Consent of Instructor.
Addresses the social, economic, cultural, policy-related, and environmental factors that affect the health of populations and individuals, and the role of health care systems (locally, regionally, nationally, and globally) in moderating the effects of these factors. Content builds on MDS 415A & MDS 415B, the TeamPEACE (Teamwork for Professionalism, Ethics, and Cultural Enrichment) curriculum in Doctoring 1, and students lived experience in UC Davis free clinics.
MDS 420
Multisystem Clinical Presentations
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of Pathophysiology Block.
Capstone course integrates coursework, knowledge, skills and experiential learning to enable the student to demonstrate a broad mastery of learning across the curriculum.  
MDS 421A
Doctoring 2
Approval by the School of Medicine Committee on Student Progress; medical students only.
Application of multidisciplinary basic, social and clinical science to clinical cases in small groups. History, physical examination with preceptors. Didactics in epidemiology, ethics, sexuality and clinical reasoning. Evaluation of professional competencies, attitudes and skills needed in the practice of medicine.
MDS 421B
Doctoring 2
Approval by the School of Medicine on Student Progress; medical students only.
Application of multidisciplinary basic, social & clinical science concepts to cases in small groups. History, physical examination with preceptors. Didactics in epidemiology, ethics, sexuality, and clinical reasoning. Evaluation of professional competencies, attitudes and skills needed in the practice of medicine.
MDS 421C
Doctoring 2
Approval by the School of Medicine Committee on Student Progress; medical students only.
Application of multidisciplinary basic, social and clinical science concepts to clinical cases in small group discussions facilitated by medical school faculty. Evaluation of professional competencies, attitudes and skills needed in the practice of clinical medicine.
MDS 421KA
ACE-PC Program Doctoring 2
MDS 411KA;  MDS 411KB;  Admission into ACE-PC.
MDS 421KA-C are a year-long series of courses. Objectives and assessments have been accelerated to accommodate the students enrolled in the ACEPC Program. Participate in all aspects of Doctoring 2, other than what was done in MDS 411KA & MDS 411KB.
MDS 421KB
ACE-PC Program Doctoring 2
Approval by the School of Medicine on Student Progress; medical students only.
MDS 421KA-C are a year-long series of courses. Objectives and assessments have been accelerated to accommodate the students enrolled in the ACEPC Program. Participate in all aspects of Doctoring 2, other than what was done in MDS 411KA & MDS 411KB.
MDS 421KC
ACE-PC Program Doctoring 2
Approval by the School of Medicine Committee on Student Progress; medical students only.
MDS 421KA-C are a year-long series of courses. Objectives and assessments have been accelerated to accommodate the students enrolled in the ACEPC Program. Participate in all aspects of Doctoring 2, other than what was done in MDS 411KA & MDS 411KB.
MDS 428
Foundations of Bioethics
Consent of Instructor.
Exposure to core content in bioethics and the law and introduce a framework for ethical decision-making, while emphasizing relationships between bioethics and clinical care.
MDS 430
Introduction to Doctoring 3
Approval by SOM Committee on Student Progress.Restricted to Medical students only.
Application of multidisciplinary basic, social and clinical science concepts to clinical cases in small group discussions facilitated by medical school faculty. Evaluation of professional competencies, attitudes and skills needed in the practice of clinical medicine. 
MDS 430A
Doctoring 3
Approval by SOM Committee on Student Progress.Restricted to Medical students only. 
Application of multidisciplinary basic, social and clinical science concepts to clinical cases in small group discussions facilitated by medical school faculty. Evaluation of professional competencies, attitudes and skills needed in the practice of clinical medicine.
MDS 430B
Doctoring 3
Approval by SOM Committee on Student Progress.Restricted to Medical students only.
Application of multidisciplinary basic, social & clinical science concepts to clinical cases in small group discussions facilitated by medical school faculty. Evaluation of professional competencies, attitudes and skills needed in the practice of clinical medicine.
MDS 430C
Doctoring 3
Approval by SOM Committee on Student Progress.Restricted to Medical students only.
Application of multidisciplinary basic, social & clinical science concepts to clinical cases in small group discussions facilitated by medical school faculty. Evaluation of professional competencies, attitudes and skills needed in the practice of clinical medicine.
MDS 430D
Doctoring 3
Approval by SOM Committee on Student Progress.Restricted to Medical students only.
Application of multidisciplinary basic, social & clinical science concepts to clinical cases in small group discussions facilitated by medical school faculty. Evaluation of professional competencies, attitudes and skills needed in the practice of clinical medicine.
MDS 435KA
ACE-PC Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship A
Consent of Instructor.
Longitudinal Clerkship will combine the Internal Medicine, OBGYN, Pediatrics, Psychiatry and Surgery Clerkships for the ACE-PC Program.
MDS 435KB
ACE-PC Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship B
Consent of Instructor.
Longitudinal Clerkship will combine the Internal Medicine, OBGYN, Pediatrics, Psychiatry and Surgery Clerkships for the ACE-PC Program.
MDS 435KC
ACE-PC Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship C
Consent of Instructor.
Longitudinal Clerkship will combine the Internal Medicine, OBGYN, Pediatrics, Psychiatry and Surgery Clerkships for the ACE-PC Program.
MDS 440
Doctoring 4 Teaching Fellowship
MDS 430A;  MDS 430B;  MDS 430C;  MDS 430D;  and Consent of Instructor.Restricted to Medical student only.
Instruction on teaching methodology and pedagogy. Mentored teaching of junior medical students in seminar, lecture, and bedside.
MDS 441
Combined Ophthalmology & Otolaryngology Clerkship
Approval by Committee on Student Promotion and Evaluation.
Fundamental knowledge of ophthalmology and otolaryngology for the treatment of eye, ear, nose and throat problems at a level of training of general physicians, including when to refer patients to a specialist.
MDS 449
Transition to Residency
Consent of Instructor.
Transition to Residency program addresses the graduating medical students need to improve clinical skills necessary for the first six months of residency and unmet graduation competencies in our competency-based curriculum.
MDS 450
Introduction to UC Davis Medical Center
Second-year medical student.
Designed to assist medical student in transition from classroom to hospital setting.
MDS 468C
International Clinical Preceptorship
Consent of Instructor.  Medical students.
Multidisciplinary preceptorship in a foreign country. Clinical credit will be awarded using this course, once approval has been received from the appropriate governing committee.
MDS 468D
International Elective
Consent of Instructor.  Medical students.
Multidisciplinary preceptorship in a foreign country. Used to award non-clinical credit for international experiences which have been approved by the appropriate governing committee.
MDS 470
Introduction to Dentistry
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year medical student in good standing.
Introduction to Dentistry and basic Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery. Offered by the Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery department at UC San Francisco.
MDS 480
Insights in Clinical Research
Medical student in good standing.
Seminars on research presented by Medical School faculty; overview of pertinent issues, including medical ethics, human subjects protocols, case control methods, etc.
MDS 481
Insights into Clinical Specialties
Medical student in good standing.
Exposure to various medical specialties, their residency programs and ways in which medical students can prepare for and improve their candidacy for such programs.
MDS 483
Insights in Political, Legal & Business Aspects of Medicine
Medical students in good standing.Restricted to Medical student only.
Practical aspects of a medical career.
MDS 489
Directed Studies
Consent of Instructor.  Individual directed studies in extended preparation for modified curriculum, USMLE exams, and/or as required by Committee on Student Progress.
Independent studies to accommodate modified curriculums, prepare for taking USMLE exams and for remediation course work directed by the Committee on Student Progress.
MDS 489C
Clinical Reintroduction Experience
Consent of Instructor.
Learn and practice basic clinical skills in a supervised clinical setting. Skills include patient interviewing, history, physical examination, diagnostic and clinical reasoning, case presentation, and medical records documentation. Direct observation and individual feedback on clinical skills development is provided.
MDS 489R
USMLE Directed Remedial Studies
Recommendation by Committee on Student Progress.
Independent studies to accommodate remediation for taking USMLE exams directed by the Committee on Student Progress. 
MDS 490A
Community Health Scholars Seminar A
Consent of Instructor.
Longitudinal year-long course starting on July 1 and concluding at the end of Block 2. Focuses on immersing students in their respective communities to understand the strengths and challenges they face in relation to health.
MDS 490B
Community Health Scholars Seminar B
Consent of Instructor.
Longitudinal year-long course starting on July 1 and concluding at the end of Block 2. Focuses on immersing students in their respective communities to understand the strengths and challenges they face in relation to health.
MDS 490C
Community Health Scholars Seminar C
Consent of Instructor.
Longitudinal year-long course starting on July 1 and concluding at the end of Block 2. Focuses on immersing students in their respective communities to understand the strengths and challenges they face in relation to health.
MDS 490D
Community Health Scholars Seminar D
Consent of Instructor.
Longitudinal year-long course starting on July 1 and concluding at the end of Block 2. Focuses on immersing students in their respective communities to understand the strengths and challenges they face in relation to health.
MDS 493
Independent Special Study Module
Consent of Instructor.FYOC approval required.
Student developed alternative to the SSM/SPO Requirement.  Approval by FYOC is required.
MDS 493A
International & Comparative Health Care: SSM
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to UC Davis School of Medicine students only.
Through a series of lectures, seminars and clinical experiences, all occurring in other nations, students will research how health care systems address critical health issues. SSM Component.
MDS 493B
International & Comparative Health Care: Clinical
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to UC Davis School of Medicine students only.
Through a series of lectures, seminars and clinical experiences, all occurring in other nations, students will research how health care systems address critical health issues. Clinical Component.
MDS 493D
Teaching the Basic Sciences SSM
MDS 440 (can be concurrent);  and Consent of Instructor.  MDS 440 required concurrently.Restricted to UC Davis School of Medicine students only.
Special Studies Module, a yearlong in progress court to teach lecture and discussion education technique and theory.
MDS 493Q
Improving Quality in Health Care
Consent of Instructor.
Working in interdisciplinary teams, will explore the theory and practical methods being employed to make improvement in health care systems while providing an opportunity for interprofessional educational experience.  
MDS 493QA
Improving Quality in Health Care
Consent of Instructor.
Working in interdisciplinary teams, will explore the theory and practical methods being employed to make improvement in health care systems while providing an opportunity for interprofessional educational experience.  
MDS 493QB
Improving Quality in Health Care
Consent of Instructor.
Working in interdisciplinary teams, will explore the theory and practical methods being employed to make improvement in health care systems while providing an opportunity for interprofessional educational experience.  
MDS 493QC
Enhancing Patient Safety in Health Care
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year Medical student.
Inter-professional module is designed to explore the theory and practical methods being employed to improve patient safety in health care while providing an opportunity for interprofessional educational experience.
MDS 494
Non-Clinical Medical Student Externship
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to students with approval of credit by the Fourth Year Oversight Committee.
Generic course for awarding externship credit for medical student rotations that are not primarily focused on patient care.
MDS 495
Medicine Literature Review
Medical student in good academic standing and permission of the Associate Dean of Curricular Affairs.
Independent study: topics for selection include, but are not restricted to, medical ethics, economics and jurisprudence, culture and medicine, ethnicity and medicine, gender and medicine, history of medicine, health manpower, and medical education. A prepared paper on the selected topic will be required.
MDS 497
Scholarly Project
Consent of Instructor.  Project proposal must be accepted by the Scholarly Project Executive Committee (SPEC).Restricted to 4th year medical school students only.
Develop a research project on a focused topic area, implements the research, writes a publishable paper, and presents an oral summary of the project.
MDS 499
Medical Student Research Fellowship
Medical students in good standing and competency with computers.
Independent research project as part of the Medical Student Research Fellowship.
MGB 200A
Financial Accounting
Graduate student in the Graduate School of Management.
Introduction to the concepts and objectives underlying the preparationof financial statements. Topics include understanding the accounting cycle, measurement and valuation problems associated with financial statement components, consideration of the usefulness of financial statements in the analysis of a corporation's operations.
MGB 200B
Managerial Accounting
MGT 200A or MGB 200A or MGP 200A.
Information managers should know to be effective, including: product costing, motivating people, and differential analysis for decision making. Includes team projects and written and oral presentations.
MGB 201A
The Individual & Group Dynamics
Graduate student in the Graduate School of Management.
Examines basic psychological and social psychological processes shaping human behavior and applies knowledge of these processes to the following organizational problems: motivation, job design, commitment, socialization, culture, individual and group decision making, and team building.
MGB 201B
Organizational Strategy & Structure
Completion of first year courses in Graduate School of Management or the equivalent.Open to MBA students only.
Strategic management of organizations, including analysis of industries, firm resources and capabilities and corporate strategy. Strategy formulation, implementation and strategic decision-making. Firm and industry life cycles and change. Analysis of organizational design and structure including differentiation and integration. 
MGB 202A
Markets & the Firm
Graduate student in the Graduate School of Management.
Examines the interaction of consumers, firms and government, and the effect this interaction has on the use of resources and firm profitability. Fundamental economic concepts such as marginal analysis, opportunity cost, pricing, and externalities are introduced and applied.
MGB 202B
Business, Government, & the International Economy
MGV 202AV or MGT 202A or MGP 202A.
Examines the influence of government and international factors on business. Topics include distribution of income, business cycles, inflation and interest rates, the federal debt, monetary policy and international trade and finance.
MGB 203A
Data Analysis for Managers
Graduate student in the Graduate School of Management MBA program or consent of instructor.
Introduction to statistics and data analysis for managerial decision making. Descriptive statistics, principles of data collection, sampling, quality control, statistical inference. Application of data analytic methods to problems in marketing, finance, accounting, production, operations, and public policy.
MGB 203B
Forecasting & Managerial Research Methods
MGT 203A or MGP 203A or MGB 203A.
Practical statistical methods for managerial decision making covers regression analysis, time series analysis and forecasting, design and analysis of experiments in managerial research and contingency table analysis. Application of these methods to marketing, finance, accounting, production, operations, and public policy.
MGB 204
Marketing Management
Graduate student in the Graduate School of Management.
Analysis of market opportunities, elements of market research, development of marketing strategies, market planning and implementations, and control systems. Consumer and industrial markets, market segmentation, pricing strategies, distribution channels, promotion, and sales.
MGB 205
Financial Theory & Policy
Graduate student in the Graduate School of Management.
Corporate financial policy and investment management. Covers capital budgeting, optimal financial structure, cost-of-capital determination, risk measurement. Develops basic valuation principles for investments with long-lived and risky cash-flows, and extends these to derivative securities, asset portfolios, investment management and hedging.
MGB 206
Decision Making & Management Science
Graduate student in the Graduate School of Management MBA program or consent of instructor.
Develops decision-making and problem-solving skills in conjunction with a quantitative model-building approach. Emphasizes how structured modeling techniques, probability forecasts, simulations, and computer optimization models are used in the overall process of making decisions in an uncertain environment.
MGB 207
Management Information Systems
Graduate Student or consent of instructor.
Introduction to computer programming and data handling skills. Use of computer in organizations, emphasis on managerial aspects of computing. Standard and nonstandard uses of data files, centralization versus decentralization of computing, office automation, computer security.
MGB 215
Business Law
Completion of administration core requirements or petition with consent of instructor.
Introduction to law and legal process in the United States. Sources of law. Structure and operation of courts, federal-state relationships, fundamentals of administrative law, fundamentals of business law.
MGB 216
Managing Professionals, Budgets, Controls & Ethics
Graduate standing.
Performance measures, budgetary controls and ethical pressures which occur at middle management levels in service-type operations. Addresses such organizations as engineering, medical groups, law offices, management consultants.
MGB 220
Management of Social Networks
MGB 201A.Open to MBA students only.
Principles and applications of social network theory: coordinating divergent interests to create value for individuals and organizations. Emphasis on conceptual models, web-based diagnostic tools, and practical applications.
MGB 223
Power & Influence in Management
MGT 201A or MGB 201A or MGP 201A;  Consent of Instructor.
Investigation of the bases of power in organizations and the tactics used to translate power into influence. Topics include the control of resources (including information), social psychological processes (including commitment), the construction of meaning, and ethics.
MGB 224
Managing People in High-Performance Organizations
MGT 201A or MGB 201A or MGP 201A.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Strategic approach to the management of people within organization. Analyze employment systems' fit with firms' environments and strategies. Explore consequences of choices firms make in managing peopledecisions as to selection, performance evaluation, compensation, and other management policies and practices. 
MGB 234
Pricing
(MGT 202A or MGV 202AV or MGP 202A);  (MGP 203B or MGB 203B or MGT 203B);  (MGT 204 or MGB 204 or MGP 204).Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Combines lectures, cases and homework to teach students tools and skills necessary to analyze pricing situations, make pricing decisions, and implement them, in a systematic manner. 
MGB 239
Digital Marketing
MGB 204 or MGT 204 or MGP 204.
Equips students for a career in digital marketing and social media. Topics include online advertising, search engine optimization, interactive mktg, online privacy issues, e-commerce, social influence, social network theory, measurement of social influence, integrating social and traditional media. 
MGB 240
Management Policy & Strategy
First-year core courses of M.B.A. program.
Examines the scope of missions, objectives strategies, policies, structures, measurements and incentives which bear on the management of an organization. Real client organizations, in the private and public sectors, are assigned to student teams as the subjects of study.
MGB 241
New Product Development
MGT 204 or MGB 204 or MGP 204.Open to graduate students in the Graduate School of Management.
State-of-the-art concepts and methods to enhance the effectiveness of new product development activities. Focuses on the understanding of managerial issues and acquiring the ability to solve problems.
MGB 243
Customer Relationship Management
MGT 204 or MGB 204 or MGP 204.Restricted to MBA students only.
Customer Relationship Management (CRM) is a management approach under which marketing activities are organized and measured around customers (rather than around brands.) This approach is appealing because customers, not brands, are those who make buying decisions. 
MGB 244
New & Small Business Ventures
MGT 204 or MGP 204 or MGB 204.
Student teams develop complete business plans for their own start-up ventures. Process includes: elevator pitch, business strategy, comprehensive bottoms-up financial projections, capital requirements, product differentiation, competitive, alliance, and go-to-market strategy development, investor presentation, and comprehensive written business plan.   
MGB 245
Business Writing
Completion of first-year core courses at the Graduate School of Management or the equivalent.Restricted to MBA students only.
Techniques for sharpening writing skills are introduced, along with grammatical structure, word choice, and punctuation. Learn to develop styles that are pitch-perfect for given situations and to think strategically about each communication challenge in a management setting.
MGB 246
Negotiation & Team Building
MGB 205;  MGB 202.
Basic theory of negotiation; applies theory to process of building teams to achieve business purposes. Covers integrative and distributive strategies of claiming value, how to recognize bargaining tricks, uncovering hidden agendas, brainstorming to extend Pareto frontier.
MGB 248
Marketing Strategies
(MGT 202A or MGV 202AV or MGP 202A);  (MGP 204 or MGT 204 or MGB 204).
Examines process by which organizations develop strategic marketing plans. Includes definition of activities and products, marketing audits, appraising market opportunities, design of new activities and products, and organizing marketing planning function. Applications to problems in private and public sector marketing.
MGB 249
Marketing Research
(MGT 202A or MGV 202AV or MGP 202A);  (MGP 203A or MGB 203A or MGT 203A);  (MGT 204 or MGB 204 or MGP 204).
Addresses the managerial issues and problems of systematically gathering and analyzing information for making private and public marketing decisions. Covers the cost and value of information, research design, information collection, measuring instruments, data analysis, and marketing research applications.
MGB 250
Technology Competition & Strategy
(MGT 202A or MGV 202AV or MGP 202A);  (MGP 203A or MGB 203A or MGT 203A).Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Why is software typically so defective? Why do many firms in the IT industry give away their best products free? Helps analyze questions like these by modeling competition and strategy in the network, technology and information industries.
MGB 251
Management of Innovation
MGT 201A or MGB 201A or MGP 201A.
Managing innovative enterprise in changing and uncertain environments. Covers technology forecasting and assessment, program selection and control, financial management, regulation, and ethics.
MGB 252
Managing for Operational Excellence
MGB 203A or MGP 203A or MGT 203A.Open to students in the Graduate School of Management.
Explores the management of operations as applied to manufacturing as well as services provided both inside and outside the organization. Develop an understanding of how uncertainty affects planning and delivery by looking at fundamental models of operations.
MGB 258
Mergers & Acquisitions
MGB 205.
Focuses on the market for corporate acquisitions and restructuring activity. Topics include: sources of value creation; takeovers; anti-takeover provisions; bidding strategies; use of leverage in buyouts; regulatory risk and hurdles; and, valuation approaches for highly leveraged transactions.
MGB 259
Banking & the Financial System 
MGP 205 or MGT 205;  Consent of Instructor.
Analyzes the role of financial markets and institutions in allocating capital. Focuses on: bank lending; debt securities; financial market innovations; regulation; functions of commercial banks and other financial intermediaries. Utilizes case studies.  
MGB 260
Corporate Finance
(MGT 200A or MGB 200A or MGP 200A);  (MGP 202A or MGV 202AV or MGT 202A);  (MGT 205 or MGB 205 or MGP 205).
Focuses on planning, acquiring, and managing a company's financial resources. Includes discussion of financial aspects of mergers and other forms of reorganization; analysis of investment, financial, and dividend policy; and theories of optimal capital structure.
MGB 261
Investment Analysis
(MGT 203A or MGB 203A or MGP 203A);  (MGP 205 or MGT 205 or MGB 205).
Examines asset pricing theories and relevant evidence, including the investment performance of stocks and bonds. Topics include the efficiency of markets, domestic and international portfolio diversification, factors influencing the value of stocks and other investments, and portfolio management and performance.
MGB 263
Derivative Securities
(MGT 203A or MGB 203A or MGP 203A);  (MGP 205 or MGT 205 or MGB 205).Open to students enrolled in the MBA program. 
Behavior of options, futures, and other derivative securities markets and how public agencies, business and others use those markets. Trading strategies involving options, swaps, and financial futures contracts. Pricing of derivative securities, primarily by arbitrage methods.
MGB 265
Venture Capital & the Finance of Innovation
MGT 205 or MGB 205 or MGP 205.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Examines venture capital finance and the related practice of R&D finance. Goal is to apply finance tools and framework to the world of venture capital and financing of projects in high-growth industries.
MGB 266
International Finance
MGT 205 or MGB 205 or MGP 205;   Or the equivalent.
Studies fixed and floating exchange-rate systems. Topics include determinants of a nation's balance of international payments; macroeconomic interdependence of nations under various exchange-rate regimes and its implications for domestic stabilization policies; and the international coordination of monetary and stabilization policies.
MGB 267
Teams & Technology
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to working professional MBA students.
Theory and practice of managing teams with primary goals of: providing conceptual guidelines for analyzing and diagnosing group dynamics and determining strategic options as a manager; imparting interpersonal skills for implementing effective strategies; understanding how technological change affects team processes.
MGB 269
Business Intelligence Technologies-Data Mining
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Descriptive and Predictive Data mining methods covering association rules, clustering, classification, text mining, etc. Big data Technologies. Business applications. Hands-on data mining skills. Business intelligence for managerial decision making.
MGB 270
Corporate Financial Reporting
MGT 200A or MGP 200A or MGB 200A.
Analyzes and evaluates contemporary issues in financial reporting and develops implications of those issues for business decision makers, investment managers, and accounting policymakers.
MGB 271
Strategic Cost Management
MGT 202A or MGP 202A or MGV 202AV.Restricted to students in the MBA program. 
Theoretical frameworks and associated techniques for using organizational design and cost management to achieve a sustainable, profitable cost structure. Topics include: target costing, process design for low cost, total cost of ownership, cost of customers, implementing structural change, and incentives.
MGB 272
Evaluation of Financial Information
MGT 200A or MGP 200A or MGB 200A.
Studies how investors, creditors, others use accounting and other information in making rational investment, lending decisions. Emphasis is placed on the analysis of financial information in a variety of contexts. Where applicable, recent research in finance and economics is discussed.
MGB 274
Corporate Governance
Full-time MBA students or consent of instructor.
Discusses how corporations can better operate in the interests of shareholders and public. Directly relevant to managers, consultants in compensation and incentives, staff working on mergers and acquisitions, corporate regulators, shareholder rights activists, and board members.
MGB 276
Real Estate, Finance & Development
(MGT 205 or MGP 205 or MGB 205);  (MGT 201A or MGB 201A or MGP 201A).
Focus on single family, attached, detached, multi-family, and light commercial development. Students will study factors which make up successful real estate developments. Considers financial aspects involved in land acquisition, land development, construction, and project lending.
MGB 282
Supply Chain Management
MGT 203A or MGB 203A or MGP 203A.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Matching supply with demand is a primary challenge for a firm: excess supply is too costly, inadequate supply irritates customers. Matching supply to demand is easiest when a firm has a flexible supply process, but flexibility is generally expensive.
MGB 285
Time Series Analysis & Forecasting
MGB 203B or MGT 203B or MGP 203B.
Considers application of time series methods to evaluation and forecasting problems. Covers univariate and multivariate ARIMA models and transfer function models. Applications will be in such areas as economics, finance, budgeting, program evaluation, and industrial process control.
MGB 286
Telecommunications & Computer Networks
MGB 280.
Communication system components; common carrier services; design and control of communications networks; network management and distributed environment; local area networks; data security in computer networks.
MGB 290
Topics in General Management
Completion of all first-year graduate courses at the Graduate School of Management or the equivalent.
Advanced topics in general management. Varied topics to cover more extensively issues discussed in MGB 201A and MGB 201B, or current business interest topics in fields of business writing, business communications, development, or workplace processes.
MGB 291
Topics in Organizational Behavior
Completion of all first-year graduate courses at the Graduate School of Management or the equivalent.
Advanced topics in social psychology and sociology of organizations. Varied topics to cover more extensively issues discussed in MGB 201A and MGB 201B, or current business interest topics in fields of organization design, strategy, development, or workplace processes.
MGB 292
Topics in Finance
Completion of all first-year graduate courses at the Graduate School of Management or the equivalent.
Contemporary and emerging issues in finance. Application of modern techniques of finance to business problems. Use of appropriate electronic database and research techniques.
MGB 293
Topics in Marketing
Completion of all first-year graduate courses at the Graduate School of Management or the equivalent.
Advanced topics in marketing, which may include marketing research, new product development, brand management, pricing, distribution management, service marketing, hitech marketing, advertising, sales promotions, marketing through the Web.
MGB 294
Topics in Accounting
Completion of all first-year graduate courses at the Graduate School of Management or the equivalent.
Contemporary and emerging issues in financial management accounting. Application of modern techniques of evaluation and analysis of financial information. Use of appropriate electronic database and research techniques.
MGB 295
Topics in Information Technology 
Completion of all first-year graduate courses at the Graduate School of Management or the equivalent.
Applications of information technology to management and management of information technology. Adaptation to the dynamic nature of the field.
MGB 296
Topics in Technology Management
Completion of all first-year graduate courses at the Graduate School of Management or the equivalent.
Cyclical nature of innovation and technological change, features of innovative firms and industries, national innovation systems, and impact of information technologies on innovation processes.
MGB 297
Topics in International Management 
Completion of all first-year graduate courses at the Graduate School of Management or the equivalent.
Broader environment in which U.S. firms and their foreign competitors operate. Integration of material from other topics courses (marketing, strategy, finance, accounting, information technology, technology management) into the international setting.
MGB 298
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

MGB 299
Individual Study
Consent of Instructor.

MGB 403
Business Statistics Practicum
(MGT 203A or MGP 203A or MGB 203A);  (MGT 203B (can be concurrent) or MGP 203B (can be concurrent) or MGB 203B (can be concurrent));  MGT 203B, MGP 203B, or MGB 203B completed or required concurrently.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Applies techniques and concepts in business statistics to real case studies.
MGB 409
Managing Multi-Asset Class Investment Portfolios
MGV 202AV;  MGB 203A;  MGB 205.
Examines top down management of multi-asset class portfolios. Topics include bonds, hedge funds, private equity, real estate, commodities, endowments, return generation, performance analysis, credit cycles, financial crises, manager selection, investment policy, and investment careers. Student teams present endowment portfolio recommendations.
MGB 416
Topics in Private Equity 
MGB 205 or MGP 205 or MGT 205.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Focuses on the finance principles related to the risk and return of the private equity (PE) industry, valuation of PE target companies, the structuring of leveraged buyouts (LBOs), and the management of portfolio companies.
MGB 420
Advanced Optimization in a Python-based Modeling Language
(MGB 252 or MGT 252 or MGP 252);  (MGB 206 or MGT 206 or MGP 206).Restricted to students enrolled in the MBA program. 
Covers advanced optimization modeling techniques and practical application of modern, scalable modeling language. Techniques will be developed using examples from production planning in a supply chain, but students may explore other areas of application of optimization for their final project.
MGB 422
Behavioral Finance & Valuation
(MGT 260 or MGP 260 or MGB 260);  (MGT 261 or MGP 261 or MGB 261).Restricted to students enrolled in the MBA program. 
Investor psychology and market frictions can cause asset prices to deviate from fundamental values, creating profit opportunities for sophisticated investors. Covers techniques of financial analysis with the goal of learning how to value assets and identify mispricing.
MGB 424
Practicum for Managing People in Modern Organizations
MGB 224.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Provides solid grounding in the management of work and the employment relationship. Examines firms interrelated policies and practices for managing people.
MGB 434
Practicum for Pricing
MGB 234.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Enhance understanding of the principles and concepts learned in Pricing by (1) teaching the necessary statistical and mathematical skills, and (2) requiring a report for a real Pricing case.
MGB 440
Integrated Management Project
First-year core courses of MBA program.
Applies classroom learning to solve complex business challenges for real world clients. Student teams learnpractical consulting skills while their clients benefit from the students experience, insights, and work product.  
MGB 440A
Integrated Management Project
First-year core courses of MBA program.Restricted to full-time MBA students.
Applies classroom learning to solve complex business challenges for real world clients. Student teams learn practical consulting skills while their clients benefit from the students experience, insights, and work product.
MGB 440B
Integrated Management Project
First-year core courses of MBA program.Restricted to full-time MBA students. 
Applies classroom learning to solve complex business challenges for real world clients. Student teams learn practical consulting skills while their clients benefit from the students experience, insights, and work product.
MGB 442
Practicum for Marketing Communication
MGB 242.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Provides experience applying concepts learned in Marketing Communications to a realistic advertising or communication problem faced by firms.
MGB 443
Practicum for Customer Relationship Management
MGB 243.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Hands-on training in applying Customer Relationship Management concepts and metrics to secondary data. Enhances ability to interpret results and decide the right type of marketing actions by requiring an executive report at the end of the quarter.
MGB 448
Practicum for Marketing Strategies
MGB 248.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Provides opportunities to apply the concepts covered in the Marketing Strategies class through a group project involving the analysis of strategic marketing decisions based on business-related issues, simulation and modeling.
MGB 449
Marketing Research Practicum
MGB 249.Restricted to students in the MBA program, or in some cases with permission of instructor.  
Provides opportunities to apply the concepts and methods covered in the Marketing Research class. Hands-on and project-based, work could be either individual or in groups depending on enrollments and/or interests of students.
MGB 450
Practicum for Technology Strategy & Competition
MGB 250.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
In-depth practicum project course. Apply theories, concepts, and models, learned in MGB 250 to a real-world business problem, through data collection, data analysis, simulation, modeling and post-model interpretation.
MGB 460
Practicum for Corporate Finance & Real Estate
MGB 260.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Work in groups to select and value a financial entity. It could be a firm, a sports player, a building, a project, or a patent. Grade based on an in-class presentation and a write-up.
MGB 461
Practicum for Investment Analysis
MGB 261.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Provides practical experience applying concepts learned in Investment Analysis to a realistic portfolio management setting via a hypothetical exercise. Produce a realistic executive summary and presentation of an investment proposal for a hypothetical client.
MGB 464
Practicum & Taxes & Business Strategy
MGB 264.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Practical application project drawing from the tax planning theory contained in MGB 264. Project consists of a business formation and operation, change in organization (incorporation), and movement into multi-national and multi-jurisdictional tax.
MGB 465
Practicum for Venture Capital
MGB 265.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Provides an opportunity to apply concepts learned in Venture Capital in a realistic setting. Complete project analyzing a potential investment in a hypothetical venture and prepare an deal term sheet/investment agreement.
MGB 467
Practicum for Teams & Technology
MGB 267.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Groups investigate the performance, creativity, conflict, information sharing, and leadership behaviors of a real world team. Provide consulting advice to the team, which not only gives analytic skills, but also builds presentation skills. 
MGB 469
Practicum for Business Intelligence Technologies 
MGB 269.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Projects applying concepts learned in Business Intelligence Technologies to real business problems.
MGB 482
Practicum for Supply Chain Management
MGT 282 (can be concurrent) or MGP 282 (can be concurrent) or MGB 282 (can be concurrent);  Course is a pre-requisite or co-requisite.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Provides experience applying concepts learned in Supply Chain Management to a realistic management setting via a project.
MGB 490
Directed Group Study Management Practicum
Consent of Instructor.  Sponsorship of a GSM Academic Senate faculty member; approval of graduate advisor.
Provides opportunity for students to gain experience in applying business methodologies previously acquired in other GSM courses.
MGB 498
Directed Group Study Management Practicum
Consent of Instructor.  Sponsorship of a GSM Academic Senate faculty member, and approval of graduate advisor.
Provides the opportunity for students to gain experience in applying business methodologies previously acquired in other GSM courses.
MGB 499
Directed Individual Study Management Practicum
Consent of Instructor.  Sponsorship of a Graduate School of Management Academic Senate faculty member and approval of graduate advisor.
Provides the opportunity for students to gain experience in applying business methodologies previously acquired in other Graduate School of Management courses.
MGP 200A
Financial Accounting
Graduate student in the Graduate School of Management.
Introduction to the concepts and objectives underlying the preparationof financial statements. Topics include understanding the accounting cycle, measurement and valuation problems associated with financial statement components, consideration of the usefulness of financial statements in the analysis of a corporation's operations.
MGP 200B
Managerial Accounting
MGT 200A or MGB 200A or MGP 200A.
Information managers should know to be effective, including: product costing, motivating people, and differential analysis for decision making. Includes team projects and written and oral presentations.
MGP 201A
The Individual & Group Dynamics
Graduate student in the Graduate School of Management.
Examines basic psychological and social psychological processes shaping human behavior and applies knowledge of these processes to the following organizational problems: motivation, job design, commitment, socialization, culture, individual and group decision making, and team building.
MGP 201B
Organizational Strategy & Structure
Completion of first year courses in Graduate School of Management or equivalent.Open to MBA students only.
Strategic management of organizations, including analysis of industries, firm resources and capabilities and corporate strategy. Strategy formulation, implementation and strategic decision-making. Firm and industry life cycles and change. Analysis of organizational design and structure including differentiation and integration. 
MGP 202A
Markets & the Firm
Graduate student in the Graduate School of Management.
Examines the interaction of consumers, firms and government, and the effect this interaction has on the use of resources and firm profitability. Fundamental economic concepts such as marginal analysis, opportunity cost, pricing, and externalities are introduced and applied.
MGP 202B
Business, Government, & the International Economy
MGP 202A or MGT 202A or MGV 202AV.
Examines the influence of government and international factors on business. Topics include distribution of income, business cycles, inflation and interest rates, the federal debt, monetary policy and international trade and finance.
MGP 203A
Data Analysis for Managers
Graduate student in the Graduate School of Management MBA program or consent of instructor.
Introduction to statistics and data analysis for managerial decision making. Descriptive statistics, principles of data collection, sampling, quality control, statistical inference. Application of data analytic methods to problems in marketing, finance, accounting, production, operations, and public policy.
MGP 203B
Forecasting & Managerial Research Methods
MGP 203A or MGT 203A or MGB 203A.
Practical statistical methods for managerial decision making covers regression analysis, time series analysis and forecasting, design and analysis of experiments in managerial research and contingency table analysis. Application of these methods to marketing, finance, accounting, production, operations, and public policy.
MGP 204
Marketing Management
Graduate student in the Graduate School of Management.
Analysis of market opportunities, elements of market research, development of marketing strategies, market planning and implementations, and control systems. Consumer and industrial markets, market segmentation, pricing strategies, distribution channels, promotion, and sales.
MGP 205
Financial Theory & Policy
Graduate student in the Graduate School of Management.
Corporate financial policy and investment management. Covers capital budgeting, optimal financial structure, cost-of-capital determination, risk measurement. Develops basic valuation principles for investments with long-lived and risky cash-flows, and extends these to derivative securities, asset portfolios, investment management and hedging.
MGP 206
Decision Making & Management Science
Graduate student in the Graduate School of Management MBA program or consent of instructor.
Develops decision-making and problem-solving skills in conjunction with a quantitative model-building approach. Emphasizes how structured modeling techniques, probability forecasts, simulations, and computer optimization models are used in the overall process of making decisions in an uncertain environment.
MGP 207
Management Information Systems
Graduate student or consent of instructor.
Introduction to computer programming and data handling skills. Use of computer in organizations, emphasis on managerial aspects of computing. Standard and nonstandard uses of data files, centralization versus decentralization of computing, office automation, computer security.
MGP 215
Business Law
Completion of administration core requirements or petition with consent of instructor.
Introduction to law and legal process in the United States. Sources of law. Structure and operation of courts, federal-state relationships, fundamentals of administrative law, fundamentals of business law.
MGP 216
Managing Professionals, Budgets, Controls & Ethics
Graduate standing.
Performance measures, budgetary controls and ethical pressures which occur at middle management levels in service-type operations. Addresses such organizations as engineering, medical groups, law offices, management consultants.
MGP 220
Management of Social Networks
MGP 201A.Open to MBA students only.
Principles and applications of social network theory: coordinating divergent interests to create value for individuals and organizations. Emphasis on conceptual models, web-based diagnostic tools, and practical applications.
MGP 223
Power & Influence in Management
MGT 201A or MGB 201A or MGP 201A;  Consent of Instructor.
Investigation of the bases of power in organizations and the tactics used to translate power into influence. Topics include the control of resources (including information), social psychological processes (including commitment), the construction of meaning, and ethics.
MGP 224
Managing People in High-Performance Organizations
MGT 201A or MGB 201A or MGP 201A.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Strategic approach to the management of people within organization. Analyze employment systems' fit with firms' environments and strategies. Explore consequences of choices firms make in managing peopledecisions as to selection, performance evaluation, compensation, and other management policies and practices. 
MGP 234
Pricing
(MGT 202A or MGV 202AV or MGP 202A);  (MGP 203B or MGB 203B or MGT 203B);  (MGT 204 or MGB 204 or MGP 204).Restricted to students in the MBA Program.
Combines lectures, cases and homework to teach students tools and skills necessary to analyze pricing situations, make pricing decisions, and implement them, in a systematic manner. 
MGP 239
Digital Marketing
MGP 204 or MGT 204 or MGB 204.
Equips students for a career in digital marketing and social media. Topics include online advertising, search engine optimization, interactive mktg, online privacy issues, e-commerce, social influence, social network theory, measurement of social influence, integrating social and traditional media.
MGP 240
Management Policy & Strategy
First-year core courses of M.B.A. program.
Examines the scope of missions, objectives strategies, policies, structures, measurements and incentives which bear on the management of an organization. Real client organizations, in the private and public sectors, are assigned to student teams as the subjects of study.
MGP 241
New Product Development
MGT 204 or MGB 204 or MGP 204.Open to students in the MBA Program for Working Professionals.
State-of-the-art concepts and methods to enhance the effectiveness of new product development activities. Focuses on the understanding of managerial issues and acquiring the ability to solve problems.
MGP 243
Customer Relationship Management
MGT 204 or MGP 204 or MGB 204.Restricted to MBA students only.
Customer Relationship Management (CRM) is a management approach under which marketing activities are organized and measured around customers (rather than around brands.) This approach is appealing because customers, not brands, are those who make buying decisions. 
MGP 244
New & Small Business Ventures
MGT 204 or MGB 204 or MGP 204.
Student teams develop complete business plans for their own start-up ventures. Process includes: elevator pitch, business strategy, comprehensive bottoms-up financial projections, capital requirements, product differentiation, competitive, alliance, and go-to-market strategy development, investor presentation, and comprehensive written business plan.   
MGP 245
Business Writing
Completion of first-year core courses at the Graduate School of Management or the equivalent.Restricted to MBA students only.
Techniques for sharpening writing skills are introduced, along with grammatical structure, word choice, and punctuation. Learn to develop styles that are pitch-perfect for given situations and to think strategically about each communication challenge in a management setting.
MGP 246
Negotiation & Team Building
MGP 205;  MGP 202.
Basic theory of negotiation; applies theory to process of building teams to achieve business purposes. Covers integrative and distributive strategies of claiming value, how to recognize bargaining tricks, uncovering hidden agendas, brainstorming to extend Pareto frontier.
MGP 248
Marketing Strategies
(MGT 202A or MGV 202AV or MGP 202A);  (MGP 204 or MGB 204 or MGT 204).
Examines process by which organizations develop strategic marketing plans. Includes definition of activities and products, marketing audits, appraising market opportunities, design of new activities and products, and organizing marketing planning function. Applications to problems in private and public sector marketing.
MGP 249
Marketing Research
(MGT 202A or MGV 202AV or MGP 202A);  (MGP 203A or MGB 203A or MGT 203A);  (MGT 204 or MGB 204 or MGP 204).
Addresses the managerial issues and problems of systematically gathering and analyzing information for making private and public marketing decisions. Covers the cost and value of information, research design, information collection, measuring instruments, data analysis, and marketing research applications.
MGP 250
Technology, Competition & Strategy
(MGT 202A or MGV 202AV or MGP 202A);  (MGP 203A or MGB 203A or MGT 203A).Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Why is software typically so defective? Why do many firms in the IT industry give away their best products free? Helps analyze questions like these by modeling competition and strategy in the network, technology and information industries.
MGP 251
Management of Innovation
MGT 201A or MGB 201A or MGP 201A.
Managing innovative enterprise in changing and uncertain environments. Covers technology forecasting and assessment, program selection and control, financial management, regulation, and ethics.
MGP 252
Managing for Operational Excellence
MGP 203A or MGB 203A or MGT 203A.Open to students in the Graduate School of Management.
Explores the management of operations as applied to manufacturing as well as services provided both inside and outside the organization. Develop an understanding of how uncertainty affects planning and delivery by looking at fundamental models of operations.
MGP 258
Mergers & Acquisitions
MGP 205 or MGT 205 or MGB 205.
Focuses on the market for corporate acquisitions and restructuring activity. Topics include: sources of value creation; takeovers; anti-takeover provisions; bidding strategies; use of leverage in buyouts; regulatory risk and hurdles; and, valuation approaches for highly leveraged transactions.
MGP 259
Banking & the Financial System 
MGB 205 or MGT 205;  Consent of Instructor.
Analyzes the role of financial markets and institutions in allocating capital. Focuses on: bank lending; debt securities; financial market innovations; regulation; functions of commercial banks and other financial intermediaries. Utilizes case studies.  
MGP 260
Corporate Finance
(MGT 200A or MGB 200A or MGP 200A);  (MGP 202A or MGV 202AV or MGT 202A);  (MGT 205 or MGB 205 or MGP 205).
Focuses on planning, acquiring, and managing a company's financial resources. Includes discussion of financial aspects of mergers and other forms of reorganization; analysis of investment, financial, and dividend policy; and theories of optimal capital structure.
MGP 261
Investment Analysis
(MGT 203A or MGP 203A or MGB 203A);  (MGB 205 or MGT 205 or MGP 205).
Examines asset pricing theories and relevant evidence, including the investment performance of stocks and bonds. Topics include the efficiency of markets, domestic and international portfolio diversification, factors influencing the value of stocks and other investments, and portfolio management and performance.
MGP 263
Derivative Securities
(MGT 205 or MGP 205 or MGB 205);  (MGT 203A or MGP 203A or MGB 203A).Open to students enrolled in the MBA program.
Behavior of options, futures, and other derivative securities markets and how public agencies, business and others use those markets. Trading strategies involving options, swaps, and financial futures contracts. Pricing of derivative securities, primarily by arbitrage methods.
MGP 265
Venture Capital & the Finance of Innovation
MGB 205 or MGP 205 or MGT 205.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Examines venture capital finance and the related practice of R&D finance. Goal is to apply finance tools and framework to the world of venture capital and financing of projects in high-growth industries.
MGP 266
International Finance
MGT 205 or MGB 205 or MGP 205;  Or the equivalent.
Studies fixed and floating exchange-rate systems. Topics include determinants of a nation's balance of international payments; macroeconomic interdependence of nations under various exchange-rate regimes and its implications for domestic stabilization policies; and the international coordination of monetary and stabilization policies.
MGP 267
Teams & Technology
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to working professional MBA students.
Theory and practice of managing teams with primary goals of: providing conceptual guidelines for analyzing and diagnosing group dynamics and determining strategic options as a manager; imparting interpersonal skills for implementing effective strategies; understanding how technological change affects team processes.
MGP 269
Business Intelligence Technologies-Data Mining
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Descriptive and Predictive Data mining methods covering association rules, clustering, classification, text mining, etc. Big data Technologies. Business applications. Hands-on data mining skills. Business intelligence for managerial decision making.
MGP 270
Corporate Financial Reporting
MGT 200A or MGP 200A or MGB 200A.
Analyzes and evaluates contemporary issues in financial reporting and develops implications of those issues for business decision makers, investment managers, and accounting policymakers.
MGP 271
Strategic Cost Management
MGT 202A or MGP 202A or MGV 202AV.Restricted to students in the MBA program. 
Theoretical frameworks and associated techniques for using organizational design and cost management to achieve a sustainable, profitable cost structure. Topics include: target costing, process design for low cost, total cost of ownership, cost of customers, implementing structural change, and incentives.
MGP 272
Evaluation of Financial Information
MGT 200A or MGB 200A or MGP 200A.
Studies how investors, creditors, others use accounting and other information in making rational investment, lending decisions. Emphasis is placed on the analysis of financial information in a variety of contexts. Where applicable, recent research in finance and economics is discussed.
MGP 274
Corporate Governance
Full-time MBA students or consent of instructor.
Discusses how corporations can better operate in the interests of shareholders and public.  Directly relevant to managers, consultants in compensation and incentives, staff working on mergers and acquisitions, corporate regulators, shareholders rights activists, and board members. 
MGP 276
Real Estate, Finance & Development
(MGT 205 or MGB 205 or MGP 205);  (MGP 201A or MGB 201A or MGT 201A).
Focus on single family, attached, detached, multi-family, and light commercial development. Students will study factors which make up successful real estate developments. Considers financial aspects involved in land acquisition, land development, construction, and project lending.
MGP 282
Supply Chain Management
MGT 203A or MGB 203A or MGP 203A.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Matching supply with demand is a primary challenge for a firm: excess supply is too costly, inadequate supply irritates customers. Matching supply to demand is easiest when a firm has a flexible supply process, but flexibility is generally expensive.
MGP 285
Time Series Analysis & Forecasting
MGP 203B or MGT 203B or MGB 203B.
Considers application of time series methods to evaluation and forecasting problems. Covers univariate and multivariate ARIMA models and transfer function models. Applications will be in such areas as economics, finance, budgeting, program evaluation, and industrial process control.
MGP 286
Telecommunications & Computer Networks
MGP 280.
Communication system components; common carrier services; design and control of communications networks; network management and distributed environment; local area networks; data security in computer networks.
MGP 290
Topics in General Management
Completion of all first-year graduate courses at the Graduate School of Management or the equivalent.
Advanced topics in general management. Varied topics to cover more extensively issues discussed in MGT 201A and MGT 201B, or current business interest topics in fields of business writing, business communications, development, or workplace processes.
MGP 291
Topics in Organizational Behavior
Completion of all first-year graduate courses at the Graduate School of Management or the equivalent.
Advanced topics in social psychology and sociology of organizations. Varied topics to cover more extensively issues discussed in MGP 201A and MGP 201B, or current business interest topics in fields of organization design, strategy, development, or workplace processes.
MGP 292
Topics in Finance
Completion of all first-year graduate courses at the Graduate School of Management or the equivalent.
Contemporary and emerging issues in finance. Application of modern techniques of finance to business problems. Use of appropriate electronic database and research techniques.
MGP 293
Topics in Marketing
Completion of all first-year graduate courses at the Graduate School of Management or the equivalent.
Advanced topics in marketing, which may include marketing research, new product development, brand management, pricing, distribution management, service marketing, hitech marketing, advertising, sales promotions, marketing through the Web. 
MGP 294
Topics in Accounting
Completion of all first-year graduate courses at the Graduate School of Management or the equivalent.
Contemporary and emerging issues in financial management accounting. Application of modern techniques of evaluation and analysis of financial information. Use of appropriate electronic database and research techniques.
MGP 295
Topics in Information Technology 
Completion of all first-year graduate courses at the Graduate School of Management or the equivalent.
Applications of information technology to management and management of information technology. Adaptation to the dynamic nature of the field.
MGP 296
Topics in Technology Management
Completion of all first-year graduate courses at the Graduate School of Management or the equivalent.
Cyclical nature of innovation and technological change, features of innovative firms and industries, national innovation systems, and impact of information technologies on innovation processes.
MGP 297
Topics in International Management 
Completion of all first-year graduate courses at the Graduate School of Management or the equivalent.
Broader environment in which U.S. firms and their foreign competitors operate. Integration of material from other topics courses (marketing, strategy, finance, accounting, information technology, technology management) into the international setting.
MGP 298
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
 
MGP 299
Individual Study
Consent of Instructor.

MGP 403
Business Statistics Practicum
(MGT 203A or MGP 203A or MGB 203A);  (MGT 203B (can be concurrent) or MGP 203B (can be concurrent) or MGB 203B (can be concurrent));  MGT 203B, MGP 203B, or MGB 203B completed or required concurrently.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Applies techniques and concepts in business statistics to real case studies.
MGP 409
Managing Multi-Asset Class Investment Portfolios
MGP 202A;  MGP 203A;  MGP 205.
Examines top down management of multi-asset class portfolios. Topics include bonds, hedge funds, private equity, real estate, commodities, endowments, return generation, performance analysis, credit cycles, financial crises, manager selection, investment policy, and investment careers. Student teams present endowment portfolio recommendations.
MGP 416
Topics in Private Equity
MGP 205 or MGT 205 or MGB 205.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Focuses on the finance principles related to the risk and return of the private equity (PE) industry, valuation of PE target companies, the structuring of leveraged buyouts (LBOs), and the management of portfolio companies.
MGP 420
Advanced Optimization in a Python-based Modeling Language
(MGP 252 or MGB 252 or MGT 252);  (MGP 206 or MGB 206 or MGT 206).Restricted to students enrolled in the MBA program. 
Covers advanced optimization modeling techniques and practical application of modern, scalable modeling language. Techniques will be developed using examples from production planning in a supply chain, but students may explore other areas of application of optimization for their final project.
MGP 422
Behavioral Finance & Valuation
(MGT 260 or MGP 260 or MGB 260);  (MGT 261 or MGP 261 or MGB 261).Restricted to students enrolled in the MBA program. 
Investor psychology and market frictions can cause asset prices to deviate from fundamental values, creating profit opportunities for sophisticated investors. Covers techniques of financial analysis with the goal of learning how to value assets and identify mispricing.
MGP 424
Practicum for Managing People in Modern Organizations
MGP 224.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Provides solid grounding in the management of work and the employment relationship. Examines firms interrelated policies and practices for managing people.
MGP 434
Practicum for Pricing
MGP 234.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Enhance understanding of the principles and concepts learned in Pricing by (1) teaching the necessary statistical and mathematical skills, and (2) requiring a report for a real Pricing case.
MGP 440
Integrated Management Project
First-year core courses of MBA program.
Applies classroom learning to solve complex business challenges for real world clients. Student teams learnpractical consulting skills while their clients benefit from the students experience, insights, and work product.  
MGP 440A
Integrated Management Project
First-year core courses of MBA program.Restricted to full-time MBA students.
Applies classroom learning to solve complex business challenges for real world clients. Student teams learn practical consulting skills while their clients benefit from the students experience, insights, and work product.
MGP 440B
Integrated Management Project
First-year core courses of MBA program.Restricted to full-time MBA students. 
Applies classroom learning to solve complex business challenges for real world clients. Student teams learn practical consulting skills while their clients benefit from the students experience, insights, and work product.
MGP 442
Practicum for Marketing Communication
MGP 242.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Provides experience applying concepts learned in Marketing Communications to a realistic advertising or communication problem faced by firms.
MGP 443
Practicum for Customer Relationship Management
MGP 243.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Hands-on training in applying Customer Relationship Management concepts and metrics to secondary data. Enhances ability to interpret results and decide the right type of marketing actions by requiring an executive report at the end of the quarter.
MGP 448
Practicum for Marketing Strategies
MGP 248.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Provides opportunities to apply the concepts covered in the Marketing Strategies class through a group project involving the analysis of strategic marketing decisions based on business-related issues, simulation and modeling.
MGP 449
Marketing Research Practicum
MGP 249.Restricted to students in the MBA program, or in some cases with permission of instructor.  
Provides opportunities to apply the concepts and methods covered in the Marketing Research class. Hands-on and project-based, work could be either individual or in groups depending on enrollments and/or interests of students.  
MGP 450
Practicum for Technology Strategy & Competition
MGP 250.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
In-depth practicum project course. Apply theories, concepts, and models, learned in MGP 250 to a real-world business problem, through data collection, data analysis, simulation, modeling and post-model interpretation.
MGP 460
Practicum for Corporate Finance & Real Estate
MGP 260.Restricted to students in the MBA Program.
Work in groups to select and value a financial entity. It could be a firm, a sports player, a building, a project, or a patent. Grade based on an in-class presentation and a write-up.  
MGP 461
Practicum for Investment Analysis
MGP 261.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Provides practical experience applying concepts learned in Investment Analysis to a realistic portfolio management setting via a hypothetical exercise. Produce a realistic executive summary and presentation of an investment proposal for a hypothetical client.
MGP 464
Practicum for Taxes & Business Strategy
MGP 264.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Practical application project drawing from the tax planning theory contained in MGP 264. Project consists of a business formation and operation, change in organization (incorporation), and movement into multi-national and multi-jurisdictional tax.
MGP 465
Practicum for Venture Capital
MGP 265.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Provides an opportunity to apply concepts learned in Venture Capital in a realistic setting. Complete project analyzing a potential investment in a hypothetical venture and prepare an deal term sheet/investment agreement.
MGP 467
Practicum for Teams & Technology
MGP 267.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Groups investigate the performance, creativity, conflict, information sharing, and leadership behaviors of a real world team. Provide consulting advice to the team, which not only gives analytic skills, but also builds presentation skills. 
MGP 469
Practicum for Business Intelligence Technologies
MGP 269.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Projects applying concepts learned in Business Intelligence Technologies to real business problems.
MGP 482
Practicum for Supply Chain Management
MGT 282 (can be concurrent) or MGP 282 (can be concurrent) or MGB 282 (can be concurrent);  Course is a pre-requisite or co-requisite.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Provides experience applying concepts learned in Supply Chain Management to a realistic management setting via a project.
MGP 490
Directed Group Study Management Practicum
Consent of Instructor.  Sponsorship of a GSM Academic Senate faculty member; approval of graduate advisor.
Provides opportunity for students to gain experience in applying business methodologies previously acquired in other GSM courses.
MGP 498
Directed Group Study Management Practicum
Consent of Instructor.  Sponsorship of a GSM Academic Senate faculty member; approval of graduate advisor.
Provides the opportunity for students to gain experience in applying business methodologies previously acquired in other GSM courses.
MGP 499
Directed Individual Study Management Practicum
Consent of Instructor.  Sponsorship of a Graduate School of Management Academic Senate faculty member; approval of graduate advisor.
Provides the opportunity for students to gain experience in applying business methodologies previously acquired in other Graduate School of Management courses.
MGT 011B
Elementary Accounting
MGT 011A.
Theory of product costing; Analyzing the role and impact of accounting information on decision making; planning and performance evaluation. 
MGT 100
Introduction to Financial Accounting
MGT 011A.Open to all upper division undergraduate and graduate students, except those in the Graduate School of Management. 
Introduction to the concepts, methods, and uses of accounting and financial reporting.
MGT 101
Sources and Uses of Accounting Information
MGT 011A;  MGT 011B.
Develops an understanding of the supply and demand of accounting information. Topics include the generation and processing of accounting information, the examination of accounting information by auditors, and the use of accounting information by capital markets and tax authorities. 
MGT 101
Sources & Uses of Accounting Information
MGT 011A C- or better;  MGT 011B C- or better;  must have C- or better in all prerequisite courses.
Develops an understanding of the supply and demand of accounting information. Topics include the generation and processing of accounting information, the examination of accounting information by auditors, and the use of accounting information by capital markets and tax authorities. 
MGT 103
Intermediate Financial Accounting I
MGT 011A;  MGT 011B.
Begin to develop expertise in the accounting for assets and introduce analysis of financial statements.
MGT 105
Intermediate Financial Accounting II
MGT 103.
Continue to develop expertise in the preparation of financial statements by studying the accounting for liabilities and stockholders equity. Examines the accounting for contracts that can have significant effects on firms financial statements.
MGT 107
Intermediate Financial Accounting III
MGT 105.
Finishes the Intermediate Financial Accounting series by examining in depth the accounting for contracts related to pensions and leases. Preparation of the statement of cash flows and footnote disclosures.
MGT 160
Financing New Business Ventures
MGT 011A;  (MAT 016B or MAT 017B or MAT 021B);  STA 013.
Concepts/methods used to structure and finance new business ventures. Topics include evaluating the net social (financial) benefit of new investment projects; raising venture capital; the role of the venture capitalist; and the choice of organizational structure in new ventures.
MGT 170
Management Accounting & Control
MGT 011A;  MGT 011B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Covers the design of cost accounting systems, the preparation of financial budgets and forecasts, cost analysis, and the use of cost and other financial data to motivate and evaluate the performance of business units and managers.
MGT 190
Special Topics in Accounting
MGT 011A;  MGT 011B;  MGT 101.
Seminar in the theory and practice of advanced or emerging areas related to the practice of professional accountancy.  Specific topics will vary according to the interests of the instructor or students. 
MGT 200A
Financial Accounting
Graduate student in the Graduate School of Management.
Introduction to the concepts and objectives underlying the preparationof financial statements. Topics include understanding the accounting cycle, measurement and valuation problems associated with financial statement components,consideration of the usefulness of financial statements in the analysis of a corporation's operations.
MGT 200B
Managerial Accounting
MGT 200A or MGB 200A or MGP 200A.
Information managers should know to be effective, including: product costing, motivating people, and differential analysis for decision making. Includes team projects and written and oral presentations.
MGT 201A
The Individual & Group Dynamics
Graduate student in the Graduate School of Management.
Examines basic psychological and social psychological processes shaping human behavior and applies knowledge of these processes to the following organizational problems: motivation, job design, commitment, socialization, culture, individual and group decision making, and team building.
MGT 201B
Organizational Strategy & Structure
Completion of first year courses in Graduate School of Management or the equivalent.Open to MBA students only.
Strategic management of organizations, including analysis of industries, firm resources and capabilities and corporate strategy. Strategy formulation, implementation and strategic decision-making. Firm and industry life cycles and change. Analysis of organizational design and structure including differentiation and integration. 
MGT 202A
Markets & the Firm
Graduate student in the Graduate School of Management.
Examines the interaction of consumers, firms and government, and the effect this interaction has on the use of resources and firm profitability. Fundamental economic concepts such as marginal analysis, opportunity cost, pricing, and externalities are introduced and applied.
MGT 202B
Business, Government, & the International Economy
MGT 202A or MGV 202AV or MGP 202A.
Examines the influence of government and international factors on business. Topics include distribution of income, business cycles, inflation and interest rates, the federal debt, monetary policy and international trade and finance.
MGT 203A
Data Analysis for Managers
Graduate student in the Graduate School of Management MBA program or consent of instructor.
Introduction to statistics and data analysis for managerial decision making. Descriptive statistics, principles of data collection, sampling, quality control, statistical inference. Application of data analytic methods to problems in marketing, finance, accounting, production, operations, and public policy.
MGT 203B
Forecasting & Managerial Research Methods
MGT 203A or MGB 203A or MGP 203A.
Practical statistical methods for managerial decision making covers regression analysis, time series analysis and forecasting, design and analysis of experiments in managerial research and contingency table analysis. Application of these methods to marketing, finance, accounting, production, operations, and public policy.
MGT 204
Marketing Management
Graduate student in the Graduate School of Management.
Analysis of market opportunities, elements of market research, development of marketing strategies, market planning and implementations, and control systems. Consumer and industrial markets, market segmentation, pricing strategies, distribution channels, promotion, and sales.
MGT 205
Financial Theory & Policy
Graduate student in the Graduate School of Management.
Corporate financial policy and investment management. Covers capital budgeting, optimal financial structure, cost-of-capital determination, risk measurement. Develops basic valuation principles for investments with long-lived and risky cash-flows, and extends these to derivative securities, asset portfolios, investment management and hedging.
MGT 206
Decision Making & Management Science
Graduate student in the Graduate School of Management MBA program or consent of instructor.
Develops decision-making and problem-solving skills in conjunction with a quantitative model-building approach. Emphasizes how structured modeling techniques, probability forecasts, simulations, and computer optimization models are used in the overall process of making decisions in an uncertain environment.
MGT 207
Management Information Systems
Graduate student or consent of instructor.
Introduction to computer programming and data handling skills. Use of computer in organizations, emphasis on managerial aspects of computing. Standard and nonstandard uses of data files, centralization versus decentralization of computing, office automation, computer security.
MGT 215
Business Law
Completion of administration core requirements or petition with consent of instructor.
Introduction to law and legal process in the United States. Sources of law. Structure and operation of courts, federal-state relationships, fundamentals of administrative law, fundamentals of business law.
MGT 216
Managing Professionals, Budgets, Controls & Ethics
Graduate standing.
Performance measures, budgetary controls and ethical pressures which occur at middle management levels in service-type operations. Addresses such organizations as engineering, medical groups, law offices, management consultants.
MGT 220
Management of Social Networks
MGT 201A.Open to MBA students only.
Principles and applications of social network theory: coordinating divergent interests to create value for individuals and organizations. Emphasis on conceptual models, web-based diagnostic tools, and practical applications.
MGT 223
Power & Influence in Management
MGT 201A or MGB 201A or MGP 201A;  Consent of Instructor.
Investigation of the bases of power in organizations and the tactics used to translate power into influence. Topics include the control of resources (including information), social psychological processes (including commitment), the construction of meaning, and ethics.
MGT 224
Managing People in High-Performance Organizations
MGT 201A or MGB 201A or MGP 201A.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Strategic approach to the management of people within organization. Analyze employment systems' fit with firms' environments and strategies. Explore consequences of choices firms make in managing peopledecisions as to selection, performance evaluation, compensation, and other management policies and practices. 
MGT 234
Pricing
(MGT 202A or MGV 202AV or MGP 202A);  (MGT 203B or MGB 203B or MGP 203B);  (MGB 204 or MGP 204 or MGT 204).Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Combines lectures, cases and homework to teach students tools and skills necessary to analyze pricing situations, make pricing decisions, and implement them, in a systematic manner. 
MGT 239
Digital Marketing
MGT 204 or MGB 204 or MGP 204.
Equips students for a career in digital marketing and social media. Topics include online advertising, search engine optimization, interactive mktg, online privacy issues, e-commerce, social influence, social network theory, measurement of social influence and integrating social and traditional media.
MGT 240
Management Policy & Strategy
First-year core courses of M.B.A. program.
Examines the scope of missions, objectives strategies, policies, structures, measurements and incentives which bear on the management of an organization. Real client organizations, in the private and public sectors, are assigned to student teams as the subjects of study.
MGT 240A
Intergrated Management Project
First-year core courses of MBA program.Restricted to full-time MBA students.
Applies classroom learning to solve complex business challenges for real world clients. Student teams learn practical consulting skills while their clients benefit from the students experience, insights, and work product.  
MGT 241
New Product Development
MGT 204 or MGB 204 or MGP 204.Open to graduate students in the Graduate School of Management.
State-of-the-art concepts and methods to enhance the effectiveness of new product development activities. Focuses on the understanding of managerial issues and acquiring the ability to solve problems.
MGT 243
Customer Relationship Management
MGT 204 or MGB 204 or MGP 204.Restricted to MBA students only.
Customer Relationship Management (CRM) is a management approach under which marketing activities are organized and measured around customers (rather than around brands.) This approach is appealing because customers, not brands, are those who make buying decisions. 
MGT 244
New & Small Business Ventures
MGT 204 or MGB 204 or MGP 204.
Student teams develop complete business plans for their own start-up ventures. Process includes: elevator pitch, business strategy, comprehensive bottoms-up financial projections, capital requirements, product differentiation, competitive, alliance, and go-to-market strategy development, investor presentation, and comprehensive written business plan.   
MGT 245
Business Writing
Completion of first-year core courses at the Graduate School of Management or the equivalent.Restricted to MBA students only.
Techniques for sharpening writing skills are introduced, along with  grammatical structure, word choice, and punctuation. Learn to develop styles that are pitch-perfect for given situations and to think strategically about each communication challenge in a management setting.
MGT 246
Negotiation & Team Building
MGT 205;  MGT 202.
Basic theory of negotiation; applies theory to process of building teams to achieve business purposes. Covers integrative and distributive strategies of claiming value, how to recognize bargaining tricks, uncovering hidden agendas, brainstorming to extend Pareto frontier.
MGT 248
Marketing Strategies
(MGT 202A or MGV 202AV or MGP 202A);  (MGP 204 or MGB 204 or MGT 204).
Examines process by which organizations develop strategic marketing plans. Includes definition of activities and products, marketing audits, appraising market opportunities, design of new activities and products, and organizing marketing planning function. Applications to problems in private and public sector marketing.
MGT 249
Marketing Research
(MGT 202A or MGV 202AV or MGP 202A);  (MGP 203A or MGB 203A or MGT 203A);  (MGT 204 or MGB 204 or MGP 204).
Addresses the managerial issues and problems of systematically gathering and analyzing information for making private and public marketing decisions. Covers the cost and value of information, research design, information collection, measuring instruments, data analysis, and marketing research applications.
MGT 250
Technology, Competition & Strategy
(MGT 202A or MGV 202AV or MGP 202A);  (MGP 203A or MGT 203A or MGB 203A).Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Why is software typically so defective? Why do many firms in the IT industry give away their best products free? Helps analyze questions like these by modeling competition and strategy in the network, technology and information industries.
MGT 251
Management of Innovation
MGT 201A or MGB 201A or MGP 201A.
Managing innovative enterprise in changing and uncertain environments. Covers technology forecasting and assessment, program selection and control, financial management, regulation, and ethics.
MGT 252
Managing for Operational Excellence
MGT 203A or MGB 203A or MGP 203A.Open to students in the Graduate School of Management.
Explores the management of operations as applied to manufacturing as well as services provided both inside and outside the organization. Develop an understanding of how uncertainty affects planning and delivery by looking at fundamental models of operations.
MGT 258
Mergers & Acquisitions
MGT 205.
Focuses on the market for corporate acquisitions and restructuring activity. Topics include: sources of value creation; takeovers; anti-takeover provisions; bidding strategies; use of leverage in buyouts; regulatory risk and hurdles; and, valuation approaches for highly leveraged transactions.
MGT 259
Banking & the Financial System 
MGB 205 or MGP 205;  Consent of Instructor.
Analyzes the role of financial markets and institutions in allocating capital. Focuses on: bank lending; debt securities; financial market innovations; regulation; functions of commercial banks and other financial intermediaries. Utilizes case studies.  
MGT 260
Corporate Finance
(MGT 200A or MGB 200A or MGP 200A);  (MGP 202A or MGV 202AV or MGT 202A);  (MGT 205 or MGP 205 or MGB 205).
Focuses on planning, acquiring, and managing a company's financial resources. Includes discussion of financial aspects of mergers and other forms of reorganization; analysis of investment, financial, and dividend policy; and theories of optimal capital structure.
MGT 261
Investment Analysis
(MGT 203A or MGB 203A or MGP 203A);  (MGP 205 or MGT 205 or MGB 205).
Examines asset pricing theories and relevant evidence, including the investment performance of stocks and bonds. Topics include the efficiency of markets, domestic and international portfolio diversification, factors influencing the value of stocks and other investments, and portfolio management and performance.
MGT 263
Derivative Securities
(MGT 203A or MGB 203A or MGP 203A);  (MGP 205 or MGT 205 or MGB 205).Open to students enrolled in the MBA program.
Behavior of options, futures, and other derivative securities markets and how public agencies, business and others use those markets. Trading strategies involving options, swaps, and financial futures contracts. Pricing of derivative securities, primarily by arbitrage methods.
MGT 265
Venture Capital & the Finance of Innovation
MGT 205 or MGP 205 or MGB 205.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Examines venture capital finance and the related practice of R&D finance. Goal is to apply finance tools and framework to the world of venture capital and financing of projects in high-growth industries.
MGT 266
International Finance
MGB 205 or MGT 205 or MGP 205;  Or the equivalent.
Studies fixed and floating exchange-rate systems. Topics include determinants of a nation's balance of international payments; macroeconomic interdependence of nations under various exchange-rate regimes and its implications for domestic stabilization policies; and the international coordination of monetary and stabilization policies.
MGT 267
Teams & Technology
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to working professional MBA students.
Theory and practice of managing teams with primary goals of: providing conceptual guidelines for analyzing and diagnosing group dynamics and determining strategic options as a manager; imparting interpersonal skills for implementing effective strategies; understanding how technological change affects team processes.
MGT 269
Business Intelligence Technologies-Data Mining
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Descriptive and Predictive Data mining methods covering association rules, clustering, classification, text mining, etc. Big data Technologies. Business applications. Hands-on data mining skills. Business intelligence for managerial decision making.
MGT 270
Corporate Financial Reporting
MGT 200A or MGP 200A or MGB 200A.
Analyzes and evaluates contemporary issues in financial reporting and develops implications of those issues for business decision makers, investment managers, and accounting policymakers.
MGT 271
Strategic Cost Management
MGT 202A or MGP 202A or MGV 202AV.Restricted to students in the MBA program. 
Theoretical frameworks and associated techniques for using organizational design and cost management to achieve a sustainable, profitable cost structure. Topics include: target costing, process design for low cost, total cost of ownership, cost of customers, implementing structural change, and incentives.
MGT 272
Evaluation of Financial Information
MGT 200A or MGP 200A or MGB 200A.
Studies how investors, creditors, others use accounting and other information in making rational investment, lending decisions. Emphasis is placed on the analysis of financial information in a variety of contexts. Where applicable, recent research in finance and economics is discussed.
MGT 274
Corporate Governance
Full-time MBA students or consent of instructor.
Discusses how corporations can better operate in the interests of shareholders and public.  Directly relevant to managers, consultants in compensation and incentives, staff working on mergers and acquisitions, corporate regulators, shareholder rights activists, and board members.
MGT 276
Real Estate, Finance & Development
(MGP 205 or MGT 205 or MGB 205);  (MGP 201A or MGB 201A or MGT 201A).
Focus on single family, attached, detached, multi-family, and light commercial development. Students will study factors which make up successful real estate developments. Considers financial aspects involved in land acquisition, land development, construction, and project lending.
MGT 282
Supply Chain Management
MGT 203A or MGP 203A or MGB 203A.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Matching supply with demand is a primary challenge for a firm: excess supply is too costly, inadequate supply irritates customers. Matching supply to demand is easiest when a firm has a flexible supply process, but flexibility is generally expensive.
MGT 285
Time Series Analysis & Forecasting
MGT 203B or MGP 203B or MGP 203B.
Considers application of time series methods to evaluation and forecasting problems. Covers univariate and multivariate ARIMA models and transfer function models. Applications will be in such areas as economics, finance, budgeting, program evaluation, and industrial process control.
MGT 286
Telecommunications & Computer Networks
MGT 280.
Communication system components; common carrier services; design and control of communications networks; network management and distributed environment; local area networks; data security in computer networks.
MGT 290
Topics in General Management
Completion of all first-year graduate courses at the Graduate School of Management or the equivalent.
Advanced topics in general management. Varied topics to cover more extensively issues discussed in MGT 201A and MGT 201B, or current business interest topics in fields of business writing, business communications, development, or workplace processes.
MGT 291
Topics in Organizational Behavior
Completion of all first-year graduate courses at the Graduate School of Management or the equivalent.
Advanced topics in social psychology and sociology of organizations. Varied topics to cover more extensively issues discussed in MGT 201A and MGT 201B, or current business interest topics in fields of organization design, strategy, development, or workplace processes.
MGT 292
Topics in Finance
Completion of all first-year graduate courses at the Graduate School of Management or the equivalent.
Contemporary and emerging issues in finance. Application of modern techniques of finance to business problems. Use of appropriate electronic database and research techniques.
MGT 293
Topics in Marketing
Completion of all first-year graduate courses at the Graduate School of Management or the equivalent.
Advanced topics in marketing, which may include marketing research, new product development, brand management, pricing, distribution management, service marketing, hitech marketing, advertising, sales promotions, marketing through the Web.
MGT 294
Topics in Accounting
Completion of all first-year graduate courses at the Graduate School of Management or the equivalent.
Contemporary and emerging issues in financial management accounting. Application of modern techniques of evaluation and analysis of financial information. Use of appropriate electronic database and research techniques.
MGT 295
Topics in Information Technology 
Completion of all first-year graduate courses at the Graduate School of Management or the equivalent.
Applications of information technology to management and management of information technology. Adaptation to the dynamic nature of the field.
MGT 296
Topics in Technology Management
Completion of all first-year graduate courses at the Graduate School of Management or the equivalent.
Cyclical nature of innovation and technological change, features of innovative firms and industries, national innovation systems, and impact of information technologies on innovation processes.
MGT 297
Topics in International Management 
Completion of all first-year graduate courses at the Graduate School of Management or the equivalent.
Broader environment in which U.S. firms and their foreign competitors operate. Integration of material from other topics courses (marketing, strategy, finance, accounting, information technology, technology management) into the international setting.
MGT 298
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

MGT 299
Individual Study
Consent of Instructor.

MGT 403
Business Statistics Practicum
(MGT 203A or MGP 203A or MGB 203A);  (MGT 203B (can be concurrent) or MGP 203B (can be concurrent) or MGB 203B (can be concurrent));  MGT 203B, MGP 203B, or MGB 203B completed or required concurrently.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Applies techniques and concepts in business statistics to real case studies.
MGT 409
Managing Multi-Asset Class Investment Portfolios
MGT 202A;  MGT 203A;  MGT 205.
Examines top down management of multi-asset class portfolios. Topics include bonds, hedge funds, private equity, real estate, commodities, endowments, return generation, performance analysis, credit cycles, financial crises, manager selection, investment policy, and investment careers. Student teams present endowment portfolio recommendations.
MGT 416
Topics in Private Equity
MGT 205;  MGB 205;  MGP 205.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Focuses on the finance principles related to the risk and return of the private equity (PE) industry, valuation of PE target companies, the structuring of leveraged buyouts (LBOs), and the management of portfolio companies.
MGT 420
Advanced Optimization in a Python-based Modeling Language
(MGT 252 or MGB 252 or MGP 252);  (MGT 206 or MGB 206 or MGP 206).Restricted to students enrolled in the MBA program. 
Covers advanced optimization modeling techniques and practical application of modern, scalable modeling language. Techniques will be developed using examples from production planning in a supply chain, but students may explore other areas of application of optimization for their final project.
MGT 422
Behavioral Finance & Valuation
(MGT 260 or MGP 260 or MGB 260);  (MGT 261 or MGP 261 or MGB 261).Restricted to students enrolled in the MBA program. 
Investor psychology and market frictions can cause asset prices to deviate from fundamental values, creating profit opportunities for sophisticated investors. Covers techniques of financial analysis with the goal of learning how to value assets and identify mispricing.
MGT 424
Practicum for Managing People in Modern Organizations
MGT 224.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Provides solid grounding in the management of work and the employment relationship. Examines firms interrelated policies and practices for managing people.
MGT 434
Practicum for Pricing
MGT 234.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Enhance understanding of the principles and concepts learned in Pricing by (1) teaching the necessary statistical and mathematical skills, and (2) requiring a report for a real Pricing case.
MGT 440
Integrated Management Project
First-year core courses of MBA program.
Applies classroom learning to solve complex business challenges for real world clients. Student teams learn practical consulting skills while their clients benefit from the students experience, insights, and work product.
MGT 440A
Integrated Management Project
First-year core courses of MBA program.Restricted to full-time (day) MBA students.
Applies classroom learning to solve complex business challenges for real world clients. Student teams learn practical consulting skills while their clients benefit from the students experience, insights, and work product.
MGT 440B
Integrated Management Project
First-year core courses of MBA program.Restricted to full-time (day) MBA students. 
Applies classroom learning to solve complex business challenges for real world clients. Student teams learn practical consulting skills while their clients benefit from the students experience, insights, and work product.
MGT 442
Practicum for Marketing Communication
MGT 242.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Provides experience applying concepts learned in Marketing Communications to a realistic advertising or communication problem faced by firms.
MGT 443
Practicum for Customer Relationship Management
MGT 243.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Hands-on training in applying Customer Relationship Management concepts and metrics to secondary data. Enhances ability to interpret results and decide the right type of marketing actions by requiring an executive report at the end of the quarter.
MGT 448
Practicum for Marketing Strategies
MGT 248.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Provides opportunities to apply the concepts covered in the Marketing Strategies class through a group project involving the analysis of strategic marketing decisions based on business-related issues, simulation and modeling.
MGT 449
Marketing Research Practicum
MGT 249.Restricted to students in the MBA program, or in some cases with permission of instructor.  
Provides opportunities to apply the concepts and methods covered in the Marketing Research class. Hands-on and project-based, work could be either individual or in groups depending on enrollments and/or interests of students.  
MGT 450
Practicum for Technology Strategy & Competition
MGT 250.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
In-depth practicum project course. Apply theories, concepts, and models, learned in MGT 250 to a real-world business problem, through data collection, data analysis, simulation, modeling and post-model interpretation.
MGT 460
Practicum for Corporate Finance & Real Estate
MGT 260.Restricted to students in the MBA Program.
Work in groups to select and value a financial entity. It could be a firm, a sports player, a building, a project, or a patent. Grade based on an in-class presentation and a write-up.
MGT 461
Practicum for Investment Analysis
MGT 261.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Provides practical experience applying concepts learned in Investment Analysis to a realistic portfolio management setting via a hypothetical exercise. Produce a realistic executive summary and presentation of an investment proposal for a hypothetical client.
MGT 464
Practicum for Taxes & Business Strategy
MGT 264.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Practical application project drawing from the tax planning theory contained in MGT 264. Project consists of a business formation and operation, change in organization (incorporation), and movement into multi-national and multi-jurisdictional tax.
MGT 465
Practicum for Venture Capital
MGT 265.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Provides an opportunity to apply concepts learned in Venture Capital in a realistic setting. Complete project analyzing a potential investment in a hypothetical venture and prepare an deal term sheet/investment agreement.
MGT 467
Practicum for Teams & Technology
MGT 267.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Groups investigate the performance, creativity, conflict, information sharing, and leadership behaviors of a real world team. Provide consulting advice to the team, which not only gives analytic skills, but also builds presentation skills. 
MGT 469
Practicum for Business Intelligence Technologies 
MGT 269.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Projects applying concepts learned in Business Intelligence Technologies to real business problems.
MGT 482
Practicum for Supply Chain Management
MGT 282 (can be concurrent) or MGP 282 (can be concurrent) or MGB 282 (can be concurrent);  Course is a pre-requisite or co-requisite.Restricted to students in the MBA program.
Provides experience applying concepts learned in Supply Chain Management to a realistic management setting via a project.
MGT 490
Directed Group Study Management Practicum
Consent of Instructor.  Sponsorship of a GSM Academic Senate faculty member; approval of graduate advisor.
Provides opportunity for students to gain experience in applying business methodologies previously acquired in other GSM courses.
MGT 498
Directed Group Study Management Practicum
Consent of Instructor.  Sponsorship of a GSM Academic Senate faculty member, and approval of graduate advisor.
Provides the opportunity for students to gain experience in applying business methodologies previously acquired in other GSM courses.
MGT 499
Directed Individual Study Management Practicum
Consent of Instructor.  Sponsorship of a Graduate School of Management Academic Senate faculty member and approval of graduate advisor.
Provides the opportunity for students to gain experience in applying business methodologies previously acquired in other Graduate School of Management courses.
MHI 202
Computer-Based Patient Records
Current enrollment within the Health Informatics Graduate Program or consent of instructor.
Introduction and overview of computer-based clinical record systems. Topics include data modeling, health system standards and terminologies; security, privacy and confidentiality; workflow modeling; data visualization; legal; decision support; public health; and evidence-based practice.
MHI 207
Decision Support Systems
Consent of Instructor.
Explores decision support systems for medical application. Topics include medical decision making, uncertainty, review of existing decision support systems, knowledge engineering, data mining, and knowledge based systems.
MHI 212
Computer Security in Health Informatics
MHI 210;  MHI 202;  MHI 209.
Critical thinking about basic concepts in computer security and privacy.  How the computer security and privacy impact health informatics, ranging from electronic health records to telemedicine to remote, virtual surgery.
MHI 289A
Special Topics in Medical Informatics: Data Acquisition
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Data Acquisition.
MHI 289E
Clinical Knowledge for the Health Informaticist
Consent of Instructor.
Basic clinical knowledge for health informatics students. Human systems, disease states and conditions, treatments and prognosis.  
MHI 289F
Database & Knowledge Management
Consent of Instructor.
Objectives include understanding the informatics techniques for data capture, information management, and knowledge generation that a student will use throughout their career. 
MHI 289G
Special Topics in Health Informatics: Biostatistics
Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in Biostatistics. Evaluation Methods and Statistics in Biomedical Informatics. Research design and analysis with special emphasis on Biomedical Informatics.
MHI 289H
Modeling Biological Systems
Consent of Instructor.Limited to 20 students.
Create awareness of how modern computer graphics have led to VR-Sim-Rob applications, and how they are modifying the teaching of medicine and in some cases the diagnosis and treatment of patients.
MHI 289I
Programming in Health Informatics
Consent of Instructor.
Basics of computer programming essential to the study of informatics. Impacts on systems within healthcare, public health, nursing, research, and others.
MIB 200A
Microbial Biology
MIC 102;  Or equivalent; prior coursework in Microbiology.
Designed to provide an overview of various aspects of microbiology and microbial processes. Topics will include microbial genetics and genomics, microbial metabolism, signaling, and adaptations.
MIB 210
Microbial Interactions
MIB 200A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Analysis at the molecular level of the interactions of microbes with the environment, microbes with other microbes, and microbes in symbiotic and/or pathogenic associations with eukaryotic hosts. Topics discussed will vary. 
MIB 290C
Advanced Research Conference
Graduate standing and/or consent of instructor.
Presentation and critical discussion of staff research activities. Designed for advanced graduate students.
MIB 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed reading and discussion on select topics. 
MIC 091
Introduction to Research 
BIS 002A;  Or equivalent.Restricted to lower division standing.
Discussion of faculty research focusing on the biochemistry, genetics, and cell biology of microorganisms, along with ways undergraduates can participate in research projects of faculty members.   
MIC 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Primarily for lower division students.
MIC 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

MIC 101
Introductory Microbiology
(BIS 001A or BIS 002A);  CHE 002B (can be concurrent).
Survey of microorganisms emphasizing their interactions with humans and diseases. Topics include microscopy, survey of various microbes, the immune system, food microbiology, microbial pathogens, and mechanisms of disease transmission. Designed for students requiring microbiology for professional schools. 
MIC 102
Introductory Microbiology
(BIS 001A or BIS 002A);  CHE 002B (can be concurrent).
Essentials of microbial biology, emphasizing phylogeny, physiology, genetics, ecology, and pathogenesis. Interactions with other microbes, humans, and the biosphere. Uses of microbes in agriculture and biotechnology. May be taught abroad.
MIC 103L
Introductory Microbiology Laboratory
MIC 102 C- or better;  CHE 002B.
Introduction to principles and laboratory methods employed in working with microorganisms. Designed for students requiring microbiology for professional school admission. May be taught abroad.
MIC 104L
General Microbiology Laboratory
MIC 102 C or better;  (CHE 008B or CHE 118B or CHE 129A);  and Consent of Instructor.Students must complete a petition for consideration of enrollment; petition available on department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics website.
Principles and laboratory methods employed in working with microorganisms. Designed for students continuing in microbiology, genetics, or biochemistry.
MIC 105
Microbial Diversity
MIC 102 or MIC 104;  BIS 101; BIS 103 or BIS 105 strongly recommended.
Survey of the major groups of microorganisms emphasizing diversity of energy metabolism, morphology, evolution, and natural history.
MIC 105L
Microbial Diversity Laboratory
(MIC 102 or MIC 104);  (MIC 102L or MIC 104L);  MIC 105 (can be concurrent).
Classical enrichments for the isolation of metabolically diverse microbes; modern molecular methods for the identification of isolates; cultivation independent analysis of microbial communities from local environmental samples.
MIC 111
Human Microbiology
MIC 102;  BIS 101.
Biology of microorganisms that form commensal, mutualistic, and pathogenic relationships with human beings, emphasizing their phylogeny, physiology, genetics, and ecology. Effects on human nutrition, development and physiology. Mechanisms of pathogenesis, immune response evasion, antibiotic action, and antibiotic resistance.
MIC 115
Recombinant DNA Cloning & Analysis
BIS 101;  Or the equivalent.
Cloning and analysis of recombinant DNA, with emphasis on Escherichia coli host-vector systems. DNA-modifying enzymes; vectors and their use; manipulation and expression of insert DNA; polymerase chain reaction; and sequence annotation. Graduate students see MIC 215.
MIC 117
Analysis of Molecular Genetic Circuits
BIS 002A;  MAT 017A;  MAT 017B;  MAT 017C;  or Consent of Instructor.
Project-based course focused on problem-solving strategies in biology and medicine. Testing hypotheses by translating real-world problems into an appropriate mathematical model and translating the results into real-world understanding. 
MIC 120
Microbial Ecology
MIC 105;  (BIS 102 or BIS 105).
Interactions between non-pathogenic microorganisms and their environment, emphasizing physiological and metabolic characteristicsof various groups and their adaptation to and modification of specific habitats.
MIC 140
Bacterial Physiology
(BIS 101,  BIS 102,  BIS 103 (can be concurrent)) or (BIS 101,  BIS 105);  MIC 102 recommended.
Fundamentals of bacterial growth and bacterial responses to environmental stresses. Topics will include carbon and nitrogen regulation, growth rate control, post-exponential growth, and motility and chemotaxis. 
MIC 150
Genomes of Pathogenic Bacteria
MIC 102;  BIS 101.
Molecular genetics and comparative genomics of representative pathogenic bacteria. Roles of mobile genetic elements, lateral gene transfer, and genome rearrangements in pathogen evolution. Mutation, recombination, and complementation as tools for genetic analysis. Content includes close examination of primary research articles.
MIC 155L
Bacterial Physiology Lab
(MIC 140 or MIC 150);  MIC 120L;  and Consent of Instructor.
Physiology and genetics of bacteria.  Isolation and characterization of mutant strains.  Mapping of mutations by conjugation and transduction studies of control of enzyme synthesis by induction, repression, and catabolite repression.  
MIC 162
General Virology
BIS 101;  BIS 102 or BIS 105 recommended.
Integrated presentation of the nature of animal, bacterial, and plant viruses, including their structure, replication and genetics.
MIC 170
Yeast Molecular Genetics
BIS 101;  MIC 102 or MIC 105 strongly recommended.
Survey of the genetics, cell biology and technologies in yeasts and related lower eukaryotes. Topics include diversity of yeasts; cell structure; metabolism; cell cycle; genetic approaches and genomics; gene expression; yeasts as models to study higher eukaryotes; and contemporary techniques.
MIC 172
Host-Parasite Interactions
MIC 102 or MIC 101 or MIC 104;  BIS 101;  Biological Sciences 102 or 105 strongly recommended.
Exploration of host-parasite interactions at multiple levels, with an emphasis on global health and medically important human parasites.
MIC 175
Cancer Biology
BIS 101;  (BIS 102 or BIS 105).
Exploration of the causes and treatments of cancer at multiple levels: molecular/cell biology, clinical manifestations, epidemiology and prevention. 
MIC 190C
Undergraduates Research Conference
MIC 199 (can be concurrent);  and Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing, MIC 199 required concurrently.
Presentation and critical discussion of staff research activities: designed for advanced undergraduate students.
MIC 191
Introduction to Research for Advanced Undergraduates
BIS 002A;  Or equivalent.Restricted to upper division standing.
Discussion of faculty research focusing on the biochemistry, genetics, and cell biology of microorganisms, along with ways undergraduates can participate in research projects of faculty members. 
MIC 194H
Microbiology Honors Research
Senior standing; eligibility for college honors; completion of 6 units of MIC 199; consent of section.
Continuation of an individual microbiological research project culminating in writing of a senior thesis under a faculty director.
MIC 197T
Tutoring in Microbiology
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Assisting the instructor in one of the section's regular courses by tutoring individual or small groups of students in a laboratory, in voluntary discussion groups, or other voluntary course activities.
MIC 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.
MIC 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

MIC 200B
Advanced Bacteriology
MIB 200A.
Intended for first-year graduate students in Microbiology and closely-related fields. Advanced topics in phylogeny, physiology and diversity of bacteria.
MIC 215
Recombinant DNA
BIS 101;  BIS 102;  BIS 103;  Or the equivalent.
Application of recombinant DNA technology to modern problems in biology, biochemistry, and genetics, emphasizing molecular cloning strategies, choice of vectors, preparation of insert DNA, and selection procedures.
MIC 217
Analysis of Molecular Genetic Circuits 
Consent of Instructor.
Project-based course focused on problem-solving strategies in biology. Emphasis on testing hypotheses by translating real-world problems into an appropriate mathematical model and translating the results into real-world understanding. 
MIC 262
Advanced General & Molecular Virology
Graduate standing.
Advanced integrated presentation of animal, bacterial, and plant viruses, including their structure, modes of regulation, expression and replication, and effects on host cells and organisms.
MIC 263
Principles of Protein-Nucleic Acid Interactions
Advanced graduate standing and completion of one year of basic graduate course work in biochemistry, biophysics, chemistry, genetics, microbiology, or molecular biology.
Physical basis of protein-nucleic acid interaction. Topics include nucleic acid recognition by proteins, thermodynamics of protein-nucleic acid stability, and kinetics of binding process for both non-specific and sequence-specific nucleic acid binding proteins. Emphasis on systems that represent paradigms in protein-nucleic acid interactions.
MIC 274
Seminar in Genetic Recombination
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Biochemical and genetic aspects of genetic recombination in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Mechanisms of recombination and biochemical and genetic characteristics of recombination proteins. Proteins include DNA strand exchange, DNA helicases, and Holliday junction resolving proteins.
MIC 275
Seminar in DNA Repair & Recombination
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing in Microbiology or closely-related field.
Review and discussion of current research and literature in DNA repair and recombination with presentations by individual students and invited speakers.
MIC 276
Advanced Concepts in DNA Metabolism
MCB 221C or GGG 201C or equivalent course recommended.
DNA damage checkpoints, homologous recombination, and meiotic recombination. An advanced treatment of the clinical and current literature to discuss emerging principles and current models in these research areas.
MIC 290C
Advanced Research Conference
Graduate standing and/or consent of instructor.
Presentation and critical discussion of staff research activities. Designed for advanced graduate students.
MIC 291
Selected Topics in Microbiology
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Current progress in microbiology and cellular and molecular biology.
MIC 292
Seminar in Bacterial Physiology & Genetics
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing in Microbiology or closely-related field.
Review and discussion of current research and literature in bacterial physiology and genetics, with presentations by individual students.
MIC 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

MIC 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Graduate standing.

MMI 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Group Study in Medical Microbiology and Immunology; primarily for lower division students. Directed reading and discussion on selected topics. 
MMI 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to lower division standing.
Special study for lower division students.
MMI 130
Medical Mycology 
Consent of Instructor.  A course in pathogenic microbiology.
Various aspects of pathogenic fungi, particularly affecting humans, will be discussed including epidemiology, pathogenesis and pathology, diagnosis and therapy.
MMI 188
Human Immunology
Undergraduate level introductory Biology course.
Human immune system and mechanisms of immunity. Basic components and function of immune system. Molecular basis of immune response; basic cellular and molecular mechanisms. Interactions between cells of immune system producing immune responses; regulating molecules. 
MMI 192
Internship in Medical Microbiology
Upper division standing; approval of project prior to period of internship.
Supervised work experience in medical microbiology and related fields.
MMI 194H
Senior Honors Project in Medical Microbiology & Immunology
MMI 199;  and Consent of Instructor.
Project in research related to immunology of medically important viruses. Development of a hypothesis-driven project, performance of experimental protocols and preparation of graphical representation of original data. Requires oral and written presentation of research results. 
MMI 198
Group Study in Medical Microbiology
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Directed reading and discussion and/or laboratory investigation on selected topics.
MMI 199
Research in Medical Microbiology
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Individual research.
MMI 200D
Mechanisms for Microbial Interactions with Hosts
MIB 200A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Study of mechanisms involved in microbial interactions within a hostenvironment. The following principles are basic to understanding these interactions: host recognition, invasion, competition and growth, and host defense.
MMI 210A
Critical Analysis of Contemporary Research on Animal Models of Human Infectious Disease
Consent of Instructor.  Students funded by the Animal Models of Infectious Diseases Training Grant.Limited enrollment.
Topics will include diverse vertebrate and invertebrate models of human infectious diseases.
MMI 210B
Comparative Analysis of Animal Models of Human Infectious Diseases
Students funded by the Animal Models of Infectious Diseases Training Grant; others by consent of instructor.Limited enrollment.
Compares the major vertebrate and invertebrate animal models that are used most commonly to study human infectious disease, including mouse, non-human primate, Caenorhabditis elegans, and drosophila.
MMI 215
Medical Parasitology
Graduate student with consent of instructor.
Epidemiology, pathogenesis, diagnostic methods and current literature discussion of protozoa, helminths and arthropods of medical importance.
MMI 280
The Endogenous Microbiota in Health & Disease
Graduate standing.
Recent insights into the microbial communities inhabiting mucosal surfaces, and will discuss how the composition of these communities contributes to normal development, metabolism, education of the immune system, and disease susceptibility. Offered in spring quarter; even years.
MMI 298
Group Study in Medical Microbiology & Immunology
Consent of Instructor.  Open to graduate students.
Directed reading and discussion and/or laboratory investigation on selected topics. Sections 1, 2, 4, 5 are S/U grading only.
MMI 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.  Open to graduate students.
Laboratory investigation contributing to the dissertation for a graduate degree.
MMI 430
Medical Mycology
Consent of Instructor.  A course in pathogenic microbiology.
Various aspects of pathogenic fungi, particularly affecting humans, will be discussed including epidemiology, pathogenesis and pathology, diagnosis and therapy.
MMI 497T
Tutoring in Medical Microbiology
Consent of Instructor.  Appropriate preparation in subject matter.
Assist instructor by tutoring medical students in one of the departmental courses that is a component of the required curriculum of the School of Medicine.
MMI 498
Group Study in Medical Microbiology & Immunology
Medical students with consent of instructor.
Directed reading and discussion and/or laboratory investigation on selected topics.
MMI 499
Research
Medical students with consent of instructor.

MPM 202
Medical Statistics I
MPVM or MPH standing or consent of instructor.Restricted to 80 students.
Basic statistics in clinical, laboratory and population medicine: descriptive statistics; probability; binomial, Poisson, normal, t-, F-, and Chi-square distributions; sampling distributions; parameter estimation; hypothesis testing; elementary nonparametric methods, simple linear regression and correlation; life table construction and analysis.
MPM 203
Medical Statistics II
MPM 202;  or Consent of Instructor.  Or equivalent.
Continuation of MPM 202. Analysis of variance in biomedical sciences; nonparametric methods; multiple regression; unconditional logistic regression; biomedical applications of statistical methods. Microcomputer applications in population medicine to reinforce principles that are taught in lecture. Required for students in the Preventive Veterinary Program Graduate Group (PVM) and the Masters of Public Health Program (MPH).
MPM 205
Principles of Epidemiology
MPM 202;  or Consent of Instructor.  An introductory statistics course.
Basic epidemiologic concepts and approaches to epidemiologic research, with examples from veterinary and human medicine, including outbreak investigation, infectious disease epidemiology, properties of tests, and an introduction to epidemiologic study design and surveillance.
MPM 206
Epidemiologic Study Design
MPM 205;  or Consent of Instructor.
Builds on concepts presented in MPM 205. Concepts of epidemiologic study designclinical trials, observational cohort studies, case control studiesintroduced in MPM 205A are covered in more depth, using a problem-based format. Discussion of published epidemiologic studies.
MPM 209
Research Planning & Reporting II
MPM 208.
Concepts and skills in effective scientific writing for publication in a peer-reviewed journal in animal health or biomedicine. Includes developing an argument, organizing and writing a manuscript, improving readability, and responding to peer review.
MPM 212
Concepts & Methods in Infectious Disease Surveillance & Control
Consent of Instructor.
Basic and advanced level of conceptual and methodological foundations in infectious disease epidemiology necessary for veterinarians to develop and evaluate programs for detection, prevention, and control of infectious diseases in animal populations. 
MPS 001
General Science:  Science in the News
Lower division standing.
Basic principles in science including numeracy, scale, energy, and time; the scientific method; good and bad science. Emphasis on science topics recently in the news.
MPS 011A
Mathematical & Physical Sciences Seminar
Mentorship for undergraduate research participants in the physical and mathematical sciences.
Research and writing in the mathematical and physical sciences. Presentations by various science faculty members.
MPS 011B
Mathematical & Physical Sciences Seminar
Mentorship for undergraduate research participants in the physical and mathematical sciences.
Research and writing in the mathematical and physical sciences. Presentations by various science faculty members.
MSA 092
Internship in Middle East/South Asia Studies
Consent of Instructor.
Work experience on and off campus in all subject areas offered as part of the ME/SA Studies program. Internship supervised by a member of the ME/SA faculty.
MSA 092
Internship
Consent of Instructor.
Supervised internship on and off campus in the area of Middle East & South Asia Studies.
MSA 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

MSA 111A
Great Cities of Arab Middle East & South Asia
Consent of Instructor.  Some knowledge of Islamic/Middle Eastern history is very useful.
In-depth examination of the great cities of North Africa, the Middle East and South Asia as cultural and historical artifacts. Topics include: the concept of the Islamic city, processes of modernity, and representations that reinforce imagination, memory and personal identity.
MSA 131A
Modern Iranian Cinema 
Upper division standing, or consent of instructor.
Iranian cinema of the 20th century in the context of profound cultural and social changes in Iran especially since the Iranian Revolution. Productions by representative directors such as Kiarostami, Makhmalbaf, Bahram Beizaie are included. Knowledge of Persian not required.  
MSA 131B
Modern South Asia Cinema 
upper division standing or consent of instructor.
South Asian cinema of last 100 years in the context of cultural, social, and political changes. South Asian history, Independence, Partition, urban life, class, migration, postcolonial identity, diaspora, gender, sexuality, religion, sport, performance, etc
MSA 150
Women & Islamic Discourses
WMS 050;  Or comparable course.
Introduction to the debates/discourses about women and Islam. Transformations in debates/discourses in colonial and postcolonial periods in the Middle East & South Asia. Comparative study of debates/discourses on family, work, law, sexuality, religion, comportment, human rights, feminist and religious movements.
MSA 182A
Undergraduate Proseminar in Middle East/South Asia
MSA 100 recommended.Limited to 15 students.
Seminar in Iran & Persian topics specializing in region-specific Middle East & South Asia studies.
MSA 182B
Undergraduate Proseminar in Middle East/South Asia 
MSA 100 recommended.Limited to 15 students.
Seminar in India/South Asia topics specializing in region-specific Middle East & South Asia studies. 
MSA 182C
Undergraduate Proseminar in Middle East/South Asia: Arab Studies Seminar
MSA 100 recommended.Limited to 15 students.
Seminar in Arab Studies topics. 
MSA 192
Internship
Consent of Instructor.
Supervised internship on and off campus in the area of Middle East & South Asia Studies.
MSA 194H
Special Study for Honors Students
Consent of Instructor.  Open only to majors of senior standing who qualify for honors program.
Independent study of a problem in Middle East/South Asian studies involving the writing of an honors thesis.
MSA 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

MSA 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates 
Consent of Instructor.

MSC 011
U.S. Army Leadership & Personal Development
Lower division standing.
United States Army, its organization, customs, courtesies, and rank structure. Surveys personal development skills needed for effective leadership such as critical thinking, time management, and health and fitness. Familiarization with the Army ROTC program.
MSC 012
Introduction to Tactical Military Leadership
Lower division standing.
Military leadership fundamentals to include setting direction, problem-solving, presenting briefs, and using effective writing skills. Basic military tactics, orienteering and land navigation. Dimensions of leadership values, attributes, skills, and actions.
MSC 013
Introduction to Basic Military Operations
Lower division standing.
Basic military tactical theories and their application at the individual and squad level. Military tactical operations and basic military first aid.
MSC 014A
Introduction to Military Leadership Skills
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.
Personal and organizational leadership skills introduced in leadership laboratory. Extensive supervised leadership experiences conducted in a military environment. Basic military skills necessary to function in a leadership role.
MSC 014B
Introduction to Military Leadership Skills
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.
Continuation of development of leadership and military skills introduced in MSC 014A. Emphasis on the role of the individual, the basic organizational element of the Army, the squad. Supervisory controls reduced as students gain capabilities.
MSC 014C
Introduction to Military Leadership Skills
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.
Development of skills required for promotion to junior non-commissioned officer level. Chain of command from company through individual levels. Interrelationship of squad and platoon organizations.
MSC 021
Military History, Study of Battles
MSC 022B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Application of the nine Principles of War to key battles in American and World history. Tactics on a strategic and operational level. Evaluation of leadership and decision-making processes of key leaders.
MSC 022A
Innovative Team Leadership
Lower division standing or consent of instructor.
Leadership values, attributes and theories. Use of basic military skills such as land navigation and squad operations to enhance understanding of the Army.  Types of military briefings.  Practice in interpersonal skills.  Presentation of a briefing.
MSC 022B
Foundations of Tactical Leadership
MSC 022A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Leadership of tactical teams in complex operating environment. Self-assessment of leadership style. Basic military skills: terrain analysis, patrolling and operations orders. Dynamics of adaptive leadership in the context of military operations.
MSC 024A
Individual Military Leadership Skills
MSC 014A;  MSC 014B;  MSC 014C;  MSC 022A (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.  MSC 022A required concurrently.
Develop and practice personal military leadership skills in extensive supervised leadership labs.  Cadets perform basic military skills, improve on troop leading procedures and lead subordinates in tactical situations.  Begin with drill and ceremony, land navigation and individual movement techniques. 
MSC 024B
Individual Military Leadership Skills
MSC 014A;  MSC 014B;  MSC 014C;  MSC 022B (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.  MSC 022B required concurrently.
Development and practice of personal military leadership skills in extensive supervised leadership labs. Performance of basic military skills, improvement on troop-leading procedures, leadership of subordinates in tactical situations.
MSC 024C
Individual Military Leadership Skills
MSC 014A;  MSC 014B;  MSC 014C;  MSC 021 (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.  MSC 021 required concurrently.
Develop and practice personal military leadership skills in extensive supervised leadership labs. Begin with drill and ceremony, land navigation and individual movement techniques. Cadets perform basic military skills, improve on troop leading procedures and lead subordinates in tactical situations.
MSC 131
Military Leadership & Management
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Leadership and management in organizational context. Team dynamics, leadership styles, professional ethics, development of a leadership framework. Management skills for planning, decision making, and organizing developed through definition of problems, development of courses of action, implementation of solutions.
MSC 132A
Advanced Military Operations
MSC 131;  or Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Military small unit tactical theory as the basis for leadership development.  Principles of war, contemporary operating environment, Geneva Law of Land Warfare, military offensive and defensive operations.  Emphasis on development of critical thinking, problem solving, and communication skills.
MSC 132B
Applied Leadership
MSC 132A;  or Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Military small unit tactical theory and application as basis for leadership development.  Application of leadership styles and skills to complete problem-solving exercises and the development of an adaptable framework applicable to a variety of shifting environments and situations.
MSC 134A
Adaptive Tactical Leadership 
MSC 131;  or Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Small unit tactical operations serve as the basis for enhancement of leadership performance through tactical application.  Assessment of leadership attributes, skills, and actions through participation in a variety of leadership roles in problem-solving exercises.
MSC 134B
Adaptive Tactical Leadership
MSC 132A;  or Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Small unit tactical operations as the basis for enhancement of leadership performance through tactical application.  Assessment of leadership attributes, skills, and actions through participation in a variety of leadership roles in problem-solving exercises.
MSC 134C
Adaptive Tactical Leadership
MSC 132B;  or Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Small unit tactical operations are taught, serve as basis for students exploration, development.  Serve in variety of leadership roles in which leadership attributes, skills, actions are closely assessed and developed while they are faced with series of problem solving exercises.
MSC 141
Ethical Leadership
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Direct influence of leaders on individual motivation and group processes. The complexities of balancing moral, legal, and ethical obligations while applying fundamental business principles in determining the best possible outcome from competing solutions.
MSC 142
Military Law
MSC 141;  or Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
The United States Constitution and the Military Justice System. Basic law of war, with an emphasis on issues that might arise on the battlefield or during a national emergency. 
MSC 143
U.S. Army Management Systems
MSC 142;  or Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Leadership and management, focusing on four management systems: planning, organizing, leading and controlling. Practical methodologies for assessing management decisions while balancing competing ethical, economic, infrastructure and future growth trade-offs.
MSC 144A
Military Training Leadership Skills
MSC 141;  or Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Enhancement of student leadership performance through practical application.  Small unit military tactical operations as the basis for the student exploration and development.  
MSC 144B
Military Training Leadership Skills
MSC 142;  or Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Enhancement of student leadership performance through practical application.  Small unit military tactical operations serve as the basis for student exploration and development.
MSC 144C
Military Training Leadership Skills
MSC 143;  or Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Enhancement of student leadership performance through practical application.  Small unit military tactical operations as the basis for student exploration and development.
MSC 191
Special Studies in Military Science
MSC 131;  MSC 132A;  MSC 132B;  MSC 141;  MSC 142;  MSC 143;  Consent of department chair.
Intensive examination of one or more special problems in military science. Possible areas of study include leadership dimensions, principles of war, air-land battle imperatives, military strategy, the operational art and professional ethics.
MST 098F
Student Facilitated Course
Consent of Instructor.
Student facilitated course intended primarily for lower division students.
MST 131
Cross-Cultural Relations in the Medieval and/or Early Modern World 
MST 020A or MST 020B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Medieval and/or Renaissance aspects of cross culturalism. Relations between Christians, Jews, and Muslims: Europeans, Africans, and Asians; Old World and New World.
MST 189
Seminar in Medieval & Early Modern Culture
MST 020A or MST 020B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Focus on a particular problem or issue in the Medieval or Early Modern periods. Seminar topics might include (but not limited to) monasticism, origins of the university, chivalry, exploration, the role of women in the Medieval and Early Modern world.
MST 190
Senior Thesis
Senior standing and major in Medieval Studies.
Preparation of a research paper dealing with a selected aspect ofmedieval culture, under supervision of three members of the Committee in Charge.
MST 197T
Tutoring in Medieval Studies
MST 020A;  MST 020B;  Upper division standing; consent of instructor and chairperson of curriculum committee.
Tutoring in MST 020A & MST 020B, including leadership in small discussion groups affiliated with the course. 
MST 198F
Student Facilitated Course
Consent of Instructor.
Student facilitated course intended primarily for upper division students.
MST 199FA
Student Facilitated Course Development
Consent of Instructor.
Under the supervision of a faculty member, an undergraduate student plans and develops the course they will offer under 098F/198F.
MST 199FB
Student Facilitated Teaching
Consent of Instructor.
Student facilitated. Under the supervision of a faculty member, an undergraduate student teaches a course under 098F/198F.
MUS 002A
Keyboard Competence, Part 1
MUS 006A (can be concurrent);  MUS 016A (can be concurrent);  Consent of Instructor.  MUS 006A and MUS 016A required concurrently.
Training to meet the minimum piano requirements for the major in music. Scales and simple harmonic progressions in twelve keys, both major and minor.
MUS 002B
Keyboard Competence, Part 2
MUS 002A;  (MUS 006B (can be concurrent),  MUS 016B (can be concurrent));  Consent of Instructor.  MUS 006B and MUS 016B required concurrently. Completion of MUS 002A or demonstration of required keyboard proficiency level on diagnostic exam.
Training to meet the minimum piano requirements for the major in music. Harmonic progressions, modulations and score reading at the piano.
MUS 002C
Keyboard Competence, Part 3
MUS 002B;  (MUS 006C (can be concurrent),  MUS 016C (can be concurrent));  Consent of Instructor.  MUS 006C and MUS 016C required concurrently; completion of MUS 002B or demonstration of required keyboard proficiency level on diagnostic exam.
Training to meet the minimum piano requirements for the major in music. Harmonic progressions, figured bass realization, sight reading and keyboard repertory.
MUS 003B
Introduction to Music Theory, Part 2
MUS 003A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Continuation of MUS 003A. Development of melodic and harmonic writing skills. Basic analysis training. Intended for the general student.
MUS 006A
Elementary Theory, Part 1
MUS 002A (can be concurrent);  MUS 016A (can be concurrent);  required concurrently.
Development of music writing and listening skills through the study of music fundamentals, species counterpoint, harmony, analysis of repertory. Intended primarily for music majors.
MUS 006B
Elementary Theory, Part 2
MUS 002B (can be concurrent);  MUS 016B (can be concurrent);  required concurrently; completion of MUS 006A or demonstration of required proficiency level on diagnostic exam.
Continuation of MUS 006A.
MUS 006C
Elementary Theory, Part 3
MUS 002C (can be concurrent);  MUS 016C (can be concurrent);  MUS 002C & MUS 016C required concurrently; completion of MUS 006B or demonstration of required proficiency level on diagnostic exam.
Continuation of MUS 006A & MUS 006B.
MUS 007A
Intermediate Theory, Part 1
MUS 006C;  MUS 017A (can be concurrent).
Homophonic music of the Classical era with a focus on analysis of music by Haydn, Mozart, and Beethoven. Composition of pieces in the homophonic forms such as minuet and trio, theme and variations, rondo and sonata. Intended for music majors.
MUS 007B
Intermediate Theory, Part 2
MUS 007A;  MUS 017B (can be concurrent).
Harmony and voice of the 19th century leading through the music of the Romantic era. Focus on analysis of music by Chopin, Schumann, Brahms, Wagner, and Wolf. Composition of character pieces and songs. Intended for Music majors.
MUS 007C
Intermediate Theory, Part 3
MUS 007B;  MUS 017C (can be concurrent).
Music of the first thirty years of the 20th century and various analytical tools pertaining to it. Works of Debussy, Stravinsky, Schoenberg, Berg, and others. Composition of small pieces for solo instruments, voice and piano. Intended for music majors.
MUS 016A
Elementary Musicianship, Part 1
MUS 002A (can be concurrent);  MUS 006A (can be concurrent);  MUS 002A and MUS 006A required concurrently.
Melodic, rhythmic, and harmonic materials of Western music. Includes sight singing, explanations, drills, melodic/rhythmic/harmonic dictations, and listening analysis.
MUS 016B
Elementary Musicianship, Part 2
MUS 016A;  (MUS 002B (can be concurrent),  MUS 006B (can be concurrent));  MUS 002B and MUS 006B required concurrently. Completion of MUS 016A or demonstration of required proficiency level on diagnostic exam.
Melodic, rhythmic, and harmonic materials of Western music. Includes sight singing, explanations, drills, melodic/rhythmic/harmonic dictations, and listening analysis.
MUS 016C
Elementary Musicianship, Part 3
MUS 016B;  (MUS 002C (can be concurrent),  MUS 006C (can be concurrent));  MUS 002C and MUS 006C required concurrently. Completion of MUS 016B or demonstration of required proficiency level on diagnostic exam.
Melodic, rhythmic, and harmonic materials of Western music. Includes sight singing, explanations, drills, melodic/rhythmic/harmonic dictations, and listening analysis. 
MUS 017A
Intermediate Musicianship, Part 1
MUS 016C;  MUS 007A (can be concurrent);  Or demonstrate required proficiency level on diagnostic exam.
Melodic, rhythmic, and harmonic materials of Western music. Includes sight singing, explanations, drills, melodic/rhythmic/harmonic dictations, and listening analysis. 
MUS 017B
Intermediate Musicianship, Part 2
MUS 017A;  (MUS 007B (can be concurrent);  MUS 007B required concurrently. Completion of MUS 017A or demonstration of required proficiency level on diagnostic exam.
Melodic, rhythmic, and harmonic materials of Western music. Includes sight singing, explanations, drills, melodic/rhythmic/harmonic dictations, and listening analysis.
MUS 017C
Intermediate Musicianship, Part 3
MUS 017B;  Completion of MUS 017B or demonstration of required proficiency level on diagnostic exam; MUS 007C required concurrently.
The melodic, rhythmic, and harmonic materials of Western music. Includes sight singing, explanations, drills, melodic/rhythmic/harmonic dictations, and listening analysis.
MUS 024A
Introduction to the History of Music I
MUS 006A (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.
History of music from the late Baroque to Beethoven. Intended primarily for majors in music. 
MUS 024B
Introduction to the History of Music II
MUS 024A;  or Consent of Instructor.
History of music from the Romantic Period to the 19th century. Intended primarily for majors in Music.
MUS 024C
Introduction to the History of Music III
MUS 024B;  or Consent of Instructor.
History of music of the 20th century. Intended primarily for majors in music.
MUS 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study.
MUS 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.
Special study for undergraduates.
MUS 101A
Advanced Theory, Part 1 
MUS 007C.
Music of the 20th century from 1930 through 1950 and the various analytical tools pertaining to it. Works of Copland, Sessions, Schoenberg, Bartk, and Stravinsky. Composition of small pieces for piano and voice.
MUS 101B
Advanced Theory, Part 2
MUS 101A.
Music from 1950 to the present and the analytical tools pertaining to it. Works of Babbit, Carter, Dallapiccola, Ligeti, Messiaen, Reich and others. Composition of small pieces for ensemble. 
MUS 102
Tonal Counterpoint
MUS 006C;  or Consent of Instructor.
Imitative tonal counterpoint with an analytical focus on the Two-Part Inventions and fugues from the The Well-Tempered Klavier by J. S. Bach. Composition of exercises and short pieces using contrapuntal techniques. Intended for music majors. 
MUS 103
Workshop in Composition
MUS 006C;  or Consent of Instructor.
Workshop in musical composition for undergraduates who are interested in pursuing serious compositional studies and intending to follow the composition track of the major. Explores the techniques and materials of musical composition.
MUS 105
History and Analysis of Jazz
MUS 003A or MUS 010 or MUS 028;  or Consent of Instructor.
Jazz and the evolution of jazz styles in historical and cultural context. For non-majors.
MUS 105
History & Analysis of Jazz
MUS 003A or MUS 006A or MUS 010 or MUS 011 or MUS 028;  or Consent of Instructor.
Jazz and the evolution of jazz styles in historical and cultural context. For non-majors.
MUS 106
History of Rock Music
MUS 003A or MUS 010 or MUS 028;  or Consent of Instructor.
Rock and the evolution of rock styles in historical and cultural context. For non-majors.
MUS 107A
Introduction to Electronic Music
Consent of Instructor.Limited enrollment. Pass One restricted to Music and Cinema and Digital Media undergraduate students. 
Basics of electronic music history, techniques, and composition. Fixed media creation using field recordings. Focus on history, theory and techniques of musique concrte, elektronische musik, and related repertoire. 
MUS 107B
Handmade Electronic Music
MUS 107A;  Consent of Instructor.
Hacking, bending, and creating electronic circuits to make sound. Learning to read circuit diagrams, to build prototypes, and to solder components together. Repertoire study. 
MUS 108A
Orchestration
MUS 006C;  or Consent of Instructor.
Techniques of orchestration from study of basic instrumental techniques to analysis of orchestral scores and scoring for various instrumental combinations.
MUS 108B
Orchestration
MUS 108A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Techniques of orchestration from study of basic instrumental techniques to analysis of orchestral scores and scoring for various instrumental combinations.
MUS 110A
The Music of a Major Composer: Beethoven
MUS 010 or MUS 003A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Work of Beethoven will be studied in the context of his time and his contemporaries. Lectures, discussion/guided listening sections, and selected readings. For non-majors.
MUS 110A
Music of a Major Composer: Beethoven
MUS 003A or MUS 006A or MUS 010;  or Consent of Instructor.
Work of Beethoven will be studied in the context of his time and his contemporaries. Lectures, discussion/guided listening sections, and selected readings. For non-majors.
MUS 110B
The Music of a Major Composer: Stravinsky
MUS 010 or MUS 003A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Work of Stravinsky will be studied in the context of his time and his contemporaries. Lectures, discussion/guided listening sections, and selected readings. For non-majors.
MUS 110B
Music of a Major Composer: Stravinsky
MUS 003A or MUS 006A or MUS 010;  or Consent of Instructor.
Work of Stravinsky will be studied in the context of his time and his contemporaries. Lectures, discussion/guided listening sections, and selected readings. For non-majors.
MUS 110C
Music of a Major Composer: Bach
MUS 010 or MUS 003A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Work of Bach will be studied in the context of his time and his contemporaries. Lectures, discussion/guided listening sections, and selected readings. For non-majors.
MUS 110C
Music of a Major Composer: Bach
MUS 003A or MUS 006A or MUS 010;  or Consent of Instructor.
Work of Bach will be studied in the context of his time and his contemporaries. Lectures, discussion/guided listening sections, and selected readings. For non-majors.
MUS 110D
The Music of a Major Composer: Mozart
MUS 010 or MUS 003A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Work of Mozart will be studied in the context of his time and his contemporaries. Lectures, discussion/guided listening sections, and selected readings. For non-majors.
MUS 110D
Music of a Major Composer: Mozart
MUS 003A or MUS 006A or MUS 010;  or Consent of Instructor.
Work of Mozart will be studied in the context of his time and his contemporaries. Lectures, discussion/guided listening sections, and selected readings. For non-majors.
MUS 110E
The Music of a Major Composer: Haydn
MUS 010 or MUS 003A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Work of Haydn in the context of his time and his contemporaries. Lectures, discussion/guided listening sections, and selected readings. For non-majors.
MUS 110E
Music of a Major Composer: Haydn
MUS 003A or MUS 006A or MUS 010;  or Consent of Instructor.
Work of Haydn in the context of his time and his contemporaries. Lectures, discussion/guided listening sections, and selected readings. For non-majors.
MUS 110F
American Masters
MUS 010 or MUS 003A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Overview of American concert music by master composers from Charles Ives to the present. Lectures, discussion/guided listening sections, and selected readings. For non-majors.
MUS 110F
American Masters
MUS 003A or MUS 006A or MUS 010 or MUS 011 or MUS 028;  or Consent of Instructor.
Overview of American concert music by master composers from Charles Ives to the present. Lectures, discussion/guided listening sections, and selected readings. For non-majors.
MUS 110G
Music of a Major Composer: Handel
MUS 010 or MUS 003A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Work of Handel in the context of his time and his contemporaries. Lectures, discussion/guided listening sections, and selected readings. For non-majors.
MUS 110G
Music of a Major Composer: Handel
MUS 003A or MUS 006A or MUS 010;  or Consent of Instructor.
Work of Handel in the context of his time and his contemporaries. Lectures, discussion/guided listening sections, and selected readings. For non-majors.
MUS 112A
Jazz Fundamentals
MUS 003A C- or better;  or Consent of Instructor.Concurrent enrollment with MUS 140 or MUS 146 required.
Fundamentals of Jazz music theory, ear training, harmony and composition techniques. Designed to complement participation in Jazz Combo or Jazz Band. First of a three-course sequence. 
MUS 112B
Jazz Theory
MUS 112A C- or better;  Consent of Instructor.Concurrent enrollment in MUS 140 or MUS 146 required.
Intermediate level Jazz music theory, ear training, harmony, and composition techniques including improvisation. Designed to complement participation in Jazz Combo or Jazz Band. Second of a three-course sequence.
MUS 112C
Jazz Composition
MUS 112B C- or better;  Consent of Instructor.Concurrent enrollment in MUS 140 required. 
Jazz compositions and arranging in different styles using techniques of Jazz theory, harmony and improvisation. Third of a three-course sequence.
MUS 113
Introduction to Conducting
MUS 006C;  or Consent of Instructor.
Principles and techniques of conducting as they apply to both choral and instrumental ensembles.
MUS 114
Intermediate Conducting
MUS 113;  or Consent of Instructor.
Intermediate conducting with a continued focus on principles and techniques as they apply to both choral and instrumental ensembles.
MUS 115
History of Film Music
MUS 003A or MUS 010;  or Consent of Instructor.
Film music from silent films to movies of the past decade. How music supports and shapes film narrative and structure. Use of jazz, rock and classical music in film.
MUS 121
Topics in Music Scholarship
MUS 006C;  MUS 024C;  or Consent of Instructor.
Sources and problems of a historical period or musical style selected by the instructor and announced in advance.
MUS 122
Topics in Analysis & Theory
MUS 006C;  MUS 024C;  or Consent of Instructor.
Analysis of works of a composer or musical style selected by the instructor and announced in advance. Consideration of theoretical issues.
MUS 123
Music as Culture
MUS 024C;  or Consent of Instructor.
Introduction to the study of music in cross-cultural perspective. Basic theories and frameworks of ethnomusicology; in-depth case studies of three musical traditions from around the world. Intended for music majors.
MUS 124A
History of Western Music: Middle Ages to 1600
MUS 024C;  or Consent of Instructor.
Historical survey of composers and musical styles from the Middle Ages to the beginning of the 17th century. 
MUS 124B
History of Western Music: 1600-1750
MUS 124A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Historical survey of composers and musical styles from the late 1500s to the mid-18th century.
MUS 126
American Music
MUS 010 or MUS 003A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Introductory survey of American musics, including Native American music, Hispanic polyphony, New England psalmody, and selected 20th-century composers and styles.
MUS 126
American Music
MUS 003A or MUS 006A or MUS 010 or MUS 011 or MUS 028;  or Consent of Instructor.
Introductory survey of American musics, including Native American music, Hispanic polyphony, New England psalmody, and selected 20th-century composers and styles.
MUS 127
Music from Latin America 
Consent of Instructor.
Examination of music from Latin America. Characteristic music (i.e., tango, bossa nova, salsa, musica motena, musica andina) as well as its implications in other musical genres. Taught in English or Spanish depending on instructor. 
MUS 127S
Music from Latin America
Consent of Instructor.
Examination of music from Latin America. Characteristic music (i.e. tango, bossa nova, salsa, musica motena, musica andina) as well as its implications in other musical genres. Taught abroad in Spanish or English depending on instructor. 
MUS 129A
Musics of the Americas
MUS 011 or MUS 003A or MUS 010;  or Consent of Instructor.
Survey of music cultures from North, Central, and South America, including the Caribbean, with emphasis on the role of music in society and on the elements of music (instruments, theory, genres and form, etc.). Introduction to ethnomusicological theory, methods, approaches.
MUS 129A
Musics of the Americas
MUS 003A or MUS 006A or MUS 010 or MUS 011 or MUS 028;  or Consent of Instructor.
Survey of music cultures from North, Central, and South America, including the Caribbean, with emphasis on the role of music in society and on the elements of music (instruments, theory, genres and form, etc.). Introduction to ethnomusicological theory, methods, approaches.
MUS 129B
Musics of Africa, Middle East, Indian Subcontinent
MUS 011 or MUS 003A or MUS 010;  or Consent of Instructor.
Survey of music cultures with special emphasis on the role of music in society and on the elements of music (instruments, theory, genres and form, etc.). Introduction to ethnomusicological theory, methods, approaches.
MUS 129B
Musics of Africa, Middle East, Indian Subcontinent
MUS 003A or MUS 006A or MUS 010 or MUS 011 or MUS 028;  or Consent of Instructor.
Survey of music cultures with special emphasis on the role of music in society and on the elements of music (instruments, theory, genres and form, etc.). Introduction to ethnomusicological theory, methods, approaches.
MUS 129C
Musics of East and Southeast Asia
MUS 011 or MUS 003A or MUS 010;  or Consent of Instructor.
Survey of music cultures from Japan, China, Korea, Vietnam, and Indonesia, with special emphasis on the role of music in society and on the elements of music (instruments, theory, genres and form, etc.). Introduction to ethnomusicological theory, methods, approaches.
MUS 129C
Musics of East & Southeast Asia
MUS 003A or MUS 006A or MUS 010 or MUS 011 or MUS 028;  or Consent of Instructor.
Survey of music cultures from Japan, China, Korea, Vietnam, and Indonesia, with special emphasis on the role of music in society and on the elements of music (instruments, theory, genres and form, etc.). Introduction to ethnomusicological theory, methods, approaches.
MUS 129D
Folk Musics of Europe
MUS 011 or MUS 003A or MUS 010;  or Consent of Instructor.
Survey of folk musics from all of Europe, with emphasis on the role of music in society and on the elements of music (instruments, genres, form, etc.). Introduction to ethnomusicological theory, methods, approaches.
MUS 129D
Folk Musics of Europe
MUS 003A or MUS 006A or MUS 010 or MUS 011 or MUS 028;  or Consent of Instructor.
Survey of folk musics from all of Europe, with emphasis on the role of music in society and on the elements of music (instruments, genres, form, etc.). Introduction to ethnomusicological theory, methods, approaches.
MUS 130A
Applied Study of Music: Advanced; Voice
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Class instruction, arranged by section; Voice. Offered as demand indicates.
MUS 130B
Applied Study of Music: Advanced; Piano
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Class instruction, arranged by section; Piano. Offered as demand indicates.
MUS 130C
Applied Study of Music: Advanced; Harpsichord
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Class instruction, arranged by section; Harpsichord. Offered as demand indicates.
MUS 130D
Applied Study of Music: Advanced; Organ
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Class instruction, arranged by section; Organ. Offered as demand indicates.
MUS 130E
Applied Study of Music: Advanced: Violin
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Class instruction, arranged by section; Violin. Offered as demand indicates.
MUS 130F
Applied Study of Music: Advanced; Viola
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Class instruction, arranged by section; Viola. Offered as demand indicates.
MUS 130G
Applied Study of Music: Advanced; Cello
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Class instruction, arranged by section; Cello. Offered as demand indicates. 
MUS 130H
Appied Study of Music: Advanced; Double Bass
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Class instruction, arranged by section; Double Bass. Offered as demand indicates. 
MUS 130I
Applied Study of Music: Advanced; Flute
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Class instruction, arranged by section; Flute. Offered as demand indicates.
MUS 130J
Applied Study of Music: Advanced; Oboe
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Class instruction, arranged by section; Oboe. Offered as demand indicates.
MUS 130K
Applied Study of Music: Advanced; Clarinet
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Class instruction, arranged by section; Clarinet. Offered as demand indicates.
MUS 130L
Applied Study of Music: Advanced; Bassoon
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Class instruction, arranged by section; Bassoon. Offered as demand indicates.
MUS 130M
Applied Study of Music: Advanced; French Horn
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Class instruction, arranged by section; French Horn. Offered as demand indicates.
MUS 130N
Applied Study of Music: Advanced; Trumpet
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Class instruction, arranged by section; Trumpet. Offered as demand indicates.
MUS 130O
Applied Study of Music: Advanced; Trombone
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Class instruction, arranged by section; Trombone. Offered as demand indicates.
MUS 130P
Applied Study of Music: Advanced; Tuba
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Class instruction, arranged by section; Tuba. Offered as demand indicates.
MUS 130Q
Applied Study of Music: Advanced; Percussion
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Class instruction, arranged by section; Percussion. Offered as demand indicates.
MUS 130R
Applied Study of Music: Advanced; Classical Guitar
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Class instruction, arranged by section. Offered as demand indicates.
MUS 131A
Applied Study of Music: Advanced (Individual)
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Individual instruction in voice.
MUS 131B
Applied Study of Music: Advanced (Individual); Piano
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Individual instruction in Piano.
MUS 131C
Applied Study of Music: Advanced (Individual); Harpsichord
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Individual instruction in Harpsichord.
MUS 131D
Applied Study of Music: Advanced (Individual); Organ
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Individual instruction in Organ.
MUS 131E
Applied Study of Music: Advanced (Individual); Violin
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Individual instruction in Violin.
MUS 131F
Applied Study of Music: Advanced (Individual); Viola
Consent of Instructor.  Open to Music majors only; admission by audition.
Individual instruction in Viola.
MUS 131G
Applied Study of Music: Advanced (Individual); Cello
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Individual instruction in Cello.
MUS 131H
Applied Study of Music: Advanced (Individual); Double Bass
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Individual instruction in Double Bass.
MUS 131I
Applied Study of Music: Advanced (Individual); Flute
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Individual instruction in Flute.
MUS 131J
Applied Study of Music: Advanced (Individual); Oboe
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Individual instruction in Oboe.
MUS 131K
Applied Study of Music: Advanced (Individual); Clarinet
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Individual instruction in Clarinet.
MUS 131L
Applied Study of Music: Advanced (Individual); Bassoon
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Individual instruction in Bassoon.
MUS 131M
Applied Study of Music: Advanced (Individual); French Horn
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Individual instruction in French Horn.
MUS 131N
Applied Study of Music: Advanced (Individual); Trumpet
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Individual instruction in Trumpet.
MUS 131O
Applied Study of Music: Advanced (Individual);Trombone
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Individual instruction in Trombone.
MUS 131P
Applied Study of Music: Advanced (Individual); Tuba
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Individual instruction in Tuba.
MUS 131Q
Applied Study of Music: Advanced (Individual); Percussion
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Individual instruction in Percussion.
MUS 131R
Applied Study of Music: Advanced (Individual); Classical Guitar
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Individual instruction in Classical Guitar.
MUS 131U
Applied Study of Music: Advanced (Individual); Saxophone
Consent of Instructor.Open to Music majors only; admission by audition.
Individual instruction in Saxophone.
MUS 132
Singing for Actors
Consent of Instructor.
Elements of basic singing techniques, through selected exercises, vocalises, and songs.
MUS 140
University Jazz Band
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Open to students in any major. rehearsal, study, and performance of jazz band music and full variety of jazz band style, including swing, be-bob, and contemporary jazz styles.
MUS 141
University Symphony
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Open to any student in the University whose proficiency meets the requirements of concert performance. Sight-reading, rehearsal and performance of music from the orchestral literature.
MUS 142
University Chamber Singers
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Rehearsal and performance of works for small choral group. 
MUS 143
University Concert Band
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.Open to any student in the University whose proficiency meets the requirements of concert performance.
Rehearsal and performance of music for band. 
MUS 144
University Chorus
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.Open to any student in the University. 
Rehearsal and performance of choral music. 
MUS 145
Early Music Ensemble
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Rehearsal and performance of Medieval, Renaissance, and Baroque music for vocal ensemble and historical instruments.
MUS 146
Chamber Music Ensemble
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Open to any student in the University whose proficiency meets the requirements of concert performance. Study, rehearsal, and performance of ensemble music for strings, winds, voice, piano, harpsichord, and organ.
MUS 147
University Wind Ensemble
Consent of Instructor.
Rehearsal, study, and performance of a full variety of wind ensemble music; and to have students share their work in public performances.
MUS 148
Hindustani Vocal Ensemble
Consent of Instructor.
Basics of Hindustani music through theory and practice. Fundamentals of raga (mode) and tala (rhythms) with special emphasis on improvisation, a central feature of khyal (singing style). Five ragas each quarter. 
MUS 149
Indonesian Gamelan Ensemble
Consent of Instructor.
Indonesian music practice. Basic instrumental technique and repertory.salendro and degung.
MUS 150
Brasilian Samba School
Consent of Instructor.
Practice of Brasilian music. Basic instrumental technique and repertory. Focus on the percussion traditions of Rio de Janeiro and Bahia.
MUS 150
Brazilian Samba School
Consent of Instructor.
Practice of Brazilian music. Basic instrumental technique and repertory. Focus on the percussion traditions of Rio de Janeiro and Bahia.
MUS 151
Korean Percussion Ensemble
Consent of Instructor.Limited to 20 students.
Practice of Korean percussion styles. Basic instrumental technique and repertory. Focus on the percussion traditions of samulnori and basic concepts of p'ungmul.
MUS 152
Afro-Cuban Ensemble
Consent of Instructor.
Performance of African derived folkloric music of Cuba. Basic instrumental technique and repertory. Focus on percussion and song traditions from Havana, Matazas and Santiago, Cuba.
MUS 153
Brazilian Capoeira Ensemble
Consent of Instructor.
Basic instrumental techniques, songs, and dance movements of Capoeira Angola. Protocols of a Capoeira Angola performance and the meanings of Capoeira in Brazil with its connections to Afro-Brazilian culture.
MUS 155
Percussion Ensemble
Consent of Instructor.  Admission by audition.
Study and rehearsal of percussion chamber music from the 20th and 21st centuries. Study of standard and extended techniques for a broad range of percussion instruments. Public performance of significant works for percussion ensemble.  
MUS 192
Internship in Music
Consent of instructor or academic advisor.Student must submit a written proposal to an appropriate Music Department instructor.
Internship outside the university related to music.
MUS 194HA
Special Study for Honors Students
MUS 007C;  MUS 123;  Consent of Instructor.Open only to students who qualify for the honors program and admission to music Senior Honors Program.
Preparation and presentation of a culminating project, under the supervision of an instructor, in one of the creative or scholarly areas of music.
MUS 194HB
Special Study for Honors Students
MUS 194HA;  and Consent of Instructor.Open only to students who qualify for honors program and admission to Music Senior Honors Program.
Preparation and presentation of a culminating project, under the supervision of an instructor, in one of the creative or scholarly areas of music.
MUS 195
Senior Project
MUS 007C;  MUS 123;  Consent of Instructor.
Preparation of a senior project in music composition (public presentation of a new work), in music performance (a public recital), or in music history and theory (public presentation of research results). 
MUS 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study.
MUS 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.
Special study for advanced undergraduates.
MUS 204
Advanced Conducting
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in conducting.
Technical aspects of conducting and the broader issues in music history and analysis that conductors must face before leading a rehearsal or performance. 
MUS 207
Advanced Electronic & Computer Music
MUS 107A;  MUS 107B;  MUS 107C;  Consent of Instructor.
Advanced composition of computer and electronic music.
MUS 223
Topics in Ethnomusicology
 .Open to graduate students in music; advanced undergraduates & Anthropology students with consent of instructor.
In-depth ethnomusicological studies of selected cultures and their musics; study of historical, theoretical, contextual, and cultural features. 
MUS 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Consent of Instructor.
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
NAS 005
Introduction to Native American Literature
Completion of Subject A requirement.
Intensive focus on analysis of Native American literary texts, with frequent writing assignments to develop critical thinking and composition skills.
NAS 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

NAS 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

NAS 110B
Quechua Language & Society: Beginning Level 2
NAS 110A.
Second Level of the teaching of Quechua language and society.  Emphasis on development of conversational and reading skills.  Continuation of the study of aspects of contemporary Andean society and the status of Quechua language today.  
NAS 110C
Quechua Language & Society: Intermediate Level 1
NAS 110A;  NAS 110B.
Third level of the teaching of Quechua language and society. Emphasis on development of conversational and reading skills. Introduction to more complex grammatical structures. Continuing the study of contemporary Andean society and the status of Quechua language today.
NAS 110D
Quechua Language & Society: Intermediate Level 2
NAS 110A;  NAS 110B;  NAS 110C.
Fourth level of the teaching of Quechua language and society. Emphasis on complex structural patterns while emphasizing conversational skills and improving reading competence. Study of different sociopolitical processes that have affected Andean identity and the status of Quechua language.  
NAS 115
Native Americans in the Contemporary World
Upper division standing or consent of instructor.
Important issues facing Native Americans in the contemporary world. Focus primarily on the diverse ways of life, histories and realities of indigenous people throughout the Americas as they develop their own cultural and political institutions.
NAS 116
Native American Traditional Governments
NAS 001;  ANT 002.
Study of selected Native American Tribal Governments, confederations, leagues, and alliance systems.
NAS 117
Native American Governmental Decision Making
NAS 116;  POL 002;  ANT 123 recommended.
Native American governmental and community decision making with emphasis on federal and state programs, tribal sovereignty, current political trends and funding for tribal services.
NAS 118
Native American Politics
Upper division standing or consent of instructor.
Examination of the various interest groups and movements found among Native people and how they relate to the determination of Indian affairs. Study of political action available to Native groups, and local communities, along with relevant theory relating to underdevelopment.
NAS 120
Ethnopolitics of South American Indians
NAS 001;  (NAS 010 or NAS 055).
Social, political, cultural movements of indigenous South Americans in response to establishment, expansion of European colonialism, post-colonial nation-states. Ethnopolitical processes developed through interactions between Indians, Euroamericans. Socioethnographic analysis of main indigenous areas and the development of national societies. May be taught abroad.
NAS 121
Corporate Colonialism
NAS 001, NAS 010 or NAS 012 encouraged, but not required.
Price of progress and modernity for native and non-native people. History of the corporation and neoliberalism, military and intelligence agencies, debt, Taylorism, education institutions, media, and law. Discussion of alternatives advocated by contemporary and indigenous social movements.
NAS 122
Native American Community Development
NAS 001 or NAS 010.
Application of community development theory and techniques to thedevelopment problems of Native American communities.
NAS 125
Performance & Culture Among Native Americans
Consent of Instructor.
Interdisciplinary study of public expressive forms among Native Americans. Comparison and analysis of music, dances, rituals, and dramas from throughout North, Central, and South America in their social and cultural contexts. Extensive film viewing. 
NAS 130A
Native American Ethno-Historical Development
Upper division standing or consent of instructor.
Study of Native American ethno-history in North America before 1770s.
NAS 130B
Native American Ethno-Historical Development
Upper division standing or consent of instructor.
Study of Native American ethno-history in North America, 1770-1890.
NAS 130C
Native American Ethno-Historical Development
Upper division standing or consent of instructor.
Study of Native American ethno-history in North America after 1890.
NAS 134
Race, Culture, & Nation
Upper division standing or consent of instructor. NAS 001 or NAS 010 encouraged, but not required.
Exploration of complexities of Native American racial, cultural and national identities and alliances. Study of tribal and federal citizenship, mixed descent and diasporic people(s), claims to resources, ethnic fraud and contemporary movements of cultural resurgence and political sovereignty and self-determination.
NAS 135
Gender Construction in Native Societies
Upper division standing or consent of instructor; NAS 001 or NAS 010 encouraged, but not required.
Historical and traditional Native American constructions of feminine, masculine, and non-binary genders with attention to culture- and place-based gender roles and statuses. Analysis of problems with contemporary terminologies and impacts of colonization on contemporary constructions of gender identities.
NAS 146
Orientation to Research in Native American Studies
Consent of Instructor.  Native American Studies major or minor, or consent of instructor; NAS 001 or NAS 010 encouraged, but not required.
Introduction to basic research resources pertinent to Native American subjects available in the region, including libraries, archives, museums, etc. Emphasis on learning to use documentary resources or other collections of data. Students will carry out individual projects. 
NAS 181A
Native American Literature
NAS 005 or ENG 003 or COM 001 or COM 002 or COM 003.
Works of fiction (short story, novel) by contemporary Native American authors, with an emphasis on writers from the United States.
NAS 181B
Native American Literature
NAS 005 or ENG 003 or COM 001 or COM 002 or COM 003.
Works by or about Native Americans including non-fiction novels, biographies and autobiographies. Explore ways Native Americans create and recreate their culture through the creative process in literature.  Examine from a critical perspective autobiographies and testimonial literature.
NAS 184
Contemporary Indigenous Literature of Mexico
NAS 001 or NAS 010;  NAS 181A or NAS 181C recommended; reading knowledge of Spanish required.
Contemporary indigenous literature of Mexico, with a focus on the genres (poetry, fiction, drama, essay); analysis of cultural, historical, and spiritual themes, imagery, styles and performances; biographies of and influences on the Native writers themselves.
NAS 185
Native American Literature in Performance
Consent of Instructor.
Performance of contemporary Native American literature onstage, through adaptations of selected literature as well as the creation of  original pieces.   
NAS 188
Special Topics in Native American Literary Studies
Upper division standing and one of the following recommended: NAS 005, NAS 010, NAS 181A, NAS 181C.
Special topics drawn from Native American literature. 
NAS 190
Seminar in Native American Studies
Senior Standing.
Seminar of critical issues faced by Native American people.
NAS 191
Topics in Native American Studies
Upper division standing.
Selected topics in Native American Studies related to indigenous knowledges and worldviews from a historical, cultural, hemispheric perspective.  
NAS 192
Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Enrollment dependent on availability of intern position in Native American Studies or the CN Gorman Museum, with priority to Native American Studies minors/majors.Restricted to upper division standing.
Supervised internship in the CN Gorman Museum, community, and institutional settings related to Native American concerns. 
NAS 194HA
Special Studies for Honors Students
Senior qualifying for honors.
Directed reading, research and writing culminating in the completion of a senior honors thesis or project under direction of faculty advisor.
NAS 194HB
Special Studies for Honors Students
Senior qualifying for honors.
Directed reading, research and writing culminating in the completion of a senior honors thesis or project under direction of faculty advisor.
NAS 195
Field Experience in Native American Studies
NAS 161;  Senior standing and major in Native American Studies, completion of lower division major requirements.
Field work with governmental and community groups, under supervision of faculty advisor and sponsor. Knowledge acquired in other courses to be applied in field work.
NAS 196
Senior Project in Native American Studies
NAS 195 (can be concurrent);  and Consent of Instructor.  Senior standing and major in Native American Studies.
Guided research project that enables student to apply the theory and research principles from major course work. Final product is to be a major senior project or thesis.
NAS 197TC
Community Tutoring in Native American Studies
Consent of major committee; upper division standing with major in Native American Studies.
Supervise tutoring in community.
NAS 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.
NAS 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

NAS 200
Basic Concepts in Native American Studies
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Analysis of characteristics of the discipline of Native American Studies. Concentration of traditional and contemporary native scholarship and thought as well as theoretical and methodological consequences derived from application of these ideas.
NAS 202
Advanced Topics in Native American Studies
Graduate standing.
Advanced study of selected topics or themes relevant to the field of Native American studies. Topics will be announced at the time of offering.
NAS 212
Community Development for Sovereignty & Autonomy
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Examines a sample of contemporary indigenous communities from south, central and north America with the goal of understanding and evaluating the strategies adopted by Native American communities to develop and implement forms of sovereignty or autonomous self-management.
NAS 213
Native Criminality & Deviance
Graduate standing.
Examination of "deviance" in Native communities with focus on Native criminality in North America. Analysis of the concept of deviance from several different world views. Readings from a range of theories to incorporate varying theoretical perspective on criminality and deviance.
NAS 217
Public Law 83-280: Colonial Termination
Graduate standing, including school of law students.
Examination of the signature law of the Termination Era, Public Law 83-280. Discussions to include termination, societal conformity, political consent, jurisdiction, self-determination & decolonization, and colonial relationship between Native Peoples and the United States.
NAS 220
Colonialism, Neoliberalism, & Indigenous Self-Determination
Graduate standing.
History, political economy and legacies of imperial/colonial systems. Continuities and discontinuities with corporate globalization and neoliberalism. Focus on resistance and self-determination of indigenous peoples, but with comparison to other groups. 
NAS 224
Performance in the Americas
Graduate standing.
Ethnomusicological and anthropological approaches to study of public performance in the Americas. New ways of looking at music, dance, rituals and other forms of public expressive forms normally called "folklore" or "popular culture." 
NAS 250
Indigenous Critique of Classic Maya Ethnographies
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Construction of the Maya world through ethnographic writing during the present century. Deconstruction of ethnographies about the Mayans considering the modern theories and social/anthropological critiques of modern ethnographies.
NAS 298
Group Study for Graduate Students
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

NAS 299
Special Study for Graduate Students
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

NAS 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Graduate standing.

NEM 100
General Plant Nematology 
BIS 001B or BIS 010.
An introduction to the classification, morphology, biology, and control of the nematodes attacking cultivated crops.
NEM 110
Introduction to Nematology
BIS 002B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Relationship of nematodes to the human environment. Classification, morphology, ecology, distribution, and importance of nematodes occurring in water and soil as parasites of plants and animals.
NEM 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

NEM 201
Molecular & Physiological Plant Nematology 
BIS 101;  PLP 120;  (NEM 100 or NEM 110).
Molecular biology and physiology of nematodes using Caenorhabditis elegans as a model, but with emphasis on plant-parasitic species. Plant responses to nematodes. Discussion of current literature emphasized.
NEM 203
Ecology of Parasitic Nematodes
(NEM 100 or NEM 110 or ENT 156);  (EVE 101 or PLB 117).
Major concepts in population and community ecology of animal- and plant-parasitic nematodes. Current advances in techniques, theory, and basic information about nematode-host dynamics, and application to management of nematode diseases. 
NEM 204
Management of Plant-Parasitic Nematodes
NEM 100 or NEM 110.
Theory, foundation, principles and practices of nematode management. Techniques and equipment used to manage nematodes and methods used to analyze their effectiveness.
NEM 205
Insect Nematology & Biological Control
NEM 100;  NEM 110;  (ENT 100 or ENT 110).
Biology of insect-parasitic nematodes, their effect on the host, and their potential as biological control agents of insect and other invertebrate pests. Application of ecological theory in classical and augmentative biological control.
NEM 206
Nematode Systematics & Evolution
NEM 100 or NEM 110 or ENT 156;  EVE 100 recommended.
Nematode diversity as revealed by morphological and molecular evidence. Laboratory experience focuses on structural features used in taxonomy. Phylogenetic relationships based on morphological and molecular data used to consider patterns of character change among taxa. 
NEM 245
Field Nematology
NEM 100.
Six-day demonstration and field study in applied nematology including diagnosis and prediction of nematode field problem strategies for control field plot design, and establishment in association with diverse California crops.
NEM 290C
Advanced Research Conference
Graduate standing and consent of instructor.
Planning and results of research programs, proposals, and experiments. Discussion and critical evaluation of original research being conducted by the group. Discussion led by individual research instructors for research group.
NEM 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

NEM 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.

NEP 192
Internship in Nephrology
Upper division standing; approval of project by preceptor prior to internship.
Supervised work experience in nephrology.
NEP 299
Nephrology Research
Consent of Instructor.
Research topics in Nephrology. 
NEP 444
Curriculum Design for Doctoring
Consent of Instructor.  Second-year standing in School of Medicine.
Design of Doctoring curriculum for medical students in focused topic areas to be announced annually. Students design sessions, consider resource needs, and work with IORs to initiate the curriculum.
NEP 460
Nephrology & Fluid Balance
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of third-year medical school; completion of Medicine Core Clerkship.Limited enrollment.
Active participation in all inpatient/outpatient clinical activities, attendance at specific lectures and conferences at UC Davis Medical Center covering the field of nephrology and fluid-electrolyte disorders.  
NEP 499
Research in Nephrology
Consent of Instructor.  Individual arrangement.
Independent laboratory research on a specific problem related to biochemical or immunologic causes of renal disease and/or uremic disorders in humans or animals.
NEU 103
Human Clinical Neuroanatomy
CHA 101;  or Consent of Instructor.Open to upper division students.
Clinically relevant anatomy of the normal human nervous system, including external and internal anatomy of the brain, spinal cord, and cranial nerves. Blood supply to the brain and spinal cord. Functional neuroanatomy of motor, sensory, and cognitive systems. Application of neuroanatomical principles relevant to clinical problem solving for students entering health care professions.
NEU 199
Individual Special Study & Research
Consent of Instructor.
Individual special study in neurophysiology and biomedical engineering is offered to qualified students. Studies on psychophysics, single-unit electrophysiology and instrumentation are offered in Davis.
NEU 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
For graduate students desiring to explore particular topics in depth.Lectures and conferences may be involved.
NEU 299
Individual Special Study & Research
Consent of Instructor.
Individual special study and research in Neurophysiology and Biomedical engineering is offered at both Davis and Sacramento Medical Center.
NEU 450
Clinical Neurology Clerkship
Open to all fourth-year medical students; third-year medical students with consent of instructor.Restricted to six students per rotation.
Critical elements of neurological clinical skills (history & exam) and basic and clinical neurological concepts expected for general residency preparation. Active, didactic, experiential and independent learning to encourage maturation of general professional competencies.
NEU 452
Advanced Clinical Neurology
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of four-week Neurology selective.
Extension of basic Neurology clerkship. Designed for students with special interest in medical disorders of nervous system. By arrangementwith department, student may serve as an acting intern. Principles of neurological differential diagnosis and therapeutics emphasized.
NEU 455
Child Neurology
IMD 430;  OBG 430;  PED 430;  and Consent of Instructor.
Exposure to children with disorders of the nervous system, both in outpatient and inpatient services. Cases presented to a member of full-time faculty who will discuss clinical findings,differential diagnosis, management and therapy. Satisfies fourth-year neuroscience requirement.
NEU 460
Externship in Neurology
Consent of Instructor.
Externship course for Neurology rotations not meeting the qualifications to be an Acting Internship.
NEU 462
Externship in Advanced Neurology
Consent of Instructor.
Away rotation in Neurology where coursework meets the standards to be counted as an Acting Internship.
NEU 498NE
Group Study in Neurology
Medical students with consent of instructor.
Directed readings and discussions with a comprehensive written examination at the end of course.
NEU 499
Research 
Consent of Instructor.
Approved for graduate degree credit. Laboratory investigation on selected topics.
NPB 090A
Lower Division Seminar: Issues in Body Weight Regulation
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.Limited enrollment.
Critical examination of issues in body weight regulation through sharedreadings, discussions, written assignments, debates and oral presentations. Limited enrollment.
NPB 090B
Human Color Perception
Lower division standing.Limited to 15 students with lower division standing.
Neural determinants of color appearance, and why we see the world in the way we do. Discussions center around demonstrations of color phenomena and what they tell us about the human brain. 
NPB 090C
Current Issues in Animal Behavior
Lower division standing.Limited enrollment.
The mechanisms and outcomes of sexual selection (mate choice and mate competition). Theory, current models and evidence that supports or refutes the models.
NPB 090D
Lower Division Seminar: Current Issues in Reproductive Endocrinology
Lower division standing.
The integrative roles of reproductive hormones in mammalian reproduction and health. Current theory and models regarding hormone function and use in reproductive health and contraception, and evidence that supports or refutes the models.
NPB 090E
Biology of Aging
Freshman standing.
Current theories on the biology of aging covering genetic, biochemical, and physiological aspects.  Emphasis on critical evaluation of controversial and contemporary issues. 
NPB 090F
Visual Impairment & Blindness: A World Wide Problem
Lower division standing.
Examination of various abnormalities of the eye and the important geographic and cultural factors that influence the epidemiology of those abnormalities.
NPB 091C
Research Conference
NPB 099 (can be concurrent);  and Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing in Neurobiology, Physiology and Behavior or related biological science; NPB 099 required concurrently.Restricted to lower division students.
Research findings and methods in neurobiology, physiology, and/or behavior. Presentation and discussion of research by faculty and students.
NPB 092
Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.
Work experience off and on campus in all subject areas offered in theDepartment of Neurobiology, Physiology, and Behavior. Internships supervised by a member of the faculty.
NPB 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.

NPB 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.

NPB 100
Neurobiology
BIS 002A;  PHY 009A, PHY 009B or PHY 007A, PHY 007B recommended.
Brains and nervous systems, neurons and neural circuits. Coordination of movement. Development of nervous systems. Vision, hearing, and feature extraction by the central nervous system. The cell biology of learning and memory. Perception, cognition, and disorders of the brain. 
NPB 100L
Neurobiology Laboratory
NPB 100 (can be concurrent) or NPB 110B (can be concurrent).
Experimental basis of neurobiology principles discussed in NPB 100. Topics include neurophysiology, sensory systems, motor systems, cellular neuroscience, cognitive neuroscience, and quantitative data analysis and modeling techniques. 
NPB 100Q
Quantitative Foundations of Neurobiology
NPB 100 (can be concurrent).
Computational methods and mathematical models used to study phenomena in neurobiology.
NPB 101
Systemic Physiology
BIS 002A;  (CHE 002B or CHE 002BH);  PHY 001B or PHY 007C strongly recommended.
Systemic physiology with emphasis on aspects of human physiology. Functions of major organ systems, with the structure of those systems described as a basis for understanding the functions.  
NPB 101D
Systemic Physiology Discussion
NPB 101 (can be concurrent);  Consent of Instructor.
Discussion and problem solving related to fundamental principles of systemic physiology as presented in NPB 101.
NPB 101L
Systemic Physiology Laboratory
NPB 101 or NPB 110C.
Selected experiments to illustrate functional characteristics of organ systems discussed in NPB 101.
NPB 102
Animal Behavior
(BIS 001A,  BIS 001B,  BIS 001C) or (BIS 002A,  BIS 002B,  BIS 002C).
Basic principles of behavioral organization in vertebrate and invertebrate animals. Underlying physiological and ethological mechanisms. The evolution of behavior, with special emphasis on behavior under natural conditions.
NPB 102Q
Quantitative Topics in Animal Behavior
MAT 016B;  NPB 102 (can be concurrent).
Study of the quantitative concepts and exemplar models used in animal behavior.
NPB 103
Cellular Physiology/Neurobiology
(BIS 103 or BIS 105);  BIS 104;  PHY 007C recommended.
Cellular physiology with emphasis on membrane transport processes and neuronal physiology. Fundamental physical-chemical and biological mechanisms of membrane transport will be considered in relation tocytoplasmic homeostasis, communication between cells,and the cellular mechanisms of sensory and motor transduction.
NPB 104L
Cellular Physiology/Neurobiology  Laboratory
NPB 101L;  (BIS 103 or BIS 105).
Experiments in the physical and chemical processes of cells and tissues.
NPB 105
Introduction to Computer Models
CHE 002C;  PHY 007C;  (NPB 100 or NPB 101);  MAT 016C;  Or the equivalent to MAT 016C.
Introduction to the ideas, mathematical techniques and computer tools required for developing models of cellular processes in physiology and neurobiology. Applications include membrane transport, ionic channels, action potentials, Ca2+ oscillations, respiration, and muscle contraction.
NPB 105
Introduction to Computer Models
CHE 002C;  PHY 007C;  (NPB 100 or NPB 101);  MAT 016C;  Or the equivalent to MAT 016C.
Introduction to the ideas, mathematical techniques and computer tools required for developing models of cellular processes in physiology and neurobiology. Applications include membrane transport, ionic channels, action potentials, Ca2+ oscillations, respiration, and muscle contraction.
NPB 106
Experiments in Neurobiology, Physiology, & Behavior: Design & Execution
(NPB 110A or NPB 100 or NPB 101 or NPB 102);  NPB 199;  and Consent of Instructor.
Design and execution of experiments in neurobiology, physiology, and/or behavior. Choose and design a project in consultation with the sponsoring faculty member.
NPB 107
Cell Signaling in Health & Disease
BIS 102 or BIS 105.
Basics of cell signaling pathways, their disruption in disease, and their current utility and future potential as therapeutic targets. Focus is on signaling pathways specific to nervous, endocrine and immune systems, and those fundamental to all cells.
NPB 109
Kinesiology: Analysis & Control of Human Movement
PHY 007A;  PHY 007B;  NPB 101 or NPB 110C recommended; CHA 101 & CHA 101L (Same as EXB 106 & EXB 106L) or equivalent recommended.
Functional anatomy, motor control, and biomechanics of human movement understood in the context of body structures, basic principles of physics, and functional characteristics of muscle.
NPB 110A
Foundations 1: From Molecules to Individuals 
(BIS 002A,  BIS 002B);  (CHE 002B or CHE 003A);  PHY 007A and PHY 007B recommended; BIS 002C recommended.Pass One restricted to majors in Neurobiology, Physiology and Behavior.
Major concepts in cell biology with special emphasis on connections between cell biology and behavior. Includes: cellular metabolism, cellular sensing and signaling, membrane structure-function, molecular switches, electrical and chemical signaling, endocrine signaling, cell cycle and differentiation, cytoskeleton, and integrative examples. May be taught abroad.
NPB 110B
Foundations 2: Neurobiology 
NPB 110A C- or better;  PHY 007A and PHY 007B recommended.Open to declared NPB majors only.
Core concepts of neurobiology including single-neuron biophysics, synapses and transmitters, neuronal development, motor systems, central pattern generation, neuronal circuits, intracellular signal transduction, sensory processing, multisensory integration, autonomic nervous system, neuromodulation, learning and memory, and higher cognition and disease.
NPB 110C
Foundations 3: Physiology 
NPB 110A C- or better;  PHY 007A;  PHY 007B and PHY 007C recommended.Open to declared NPB majors only.
Focuses on the structure, function, and interactions of human and other animal organ systems in homeostasis and reproduction, and the response to perturbations of homeostasis; neural and endocrine signaling; skeletal muscle and movement; cardiovascular and respiratory systems; renal, digestive, immune, and reproductive physiology.
NPB 111L
Advanced Systemic Physiology Laboratory
NPB 101L.
Selected comprehensive experiments in the autonomic nervous system and the cardiovascular, respiratory, and neuromuscular systems.  Emphasis on conceptual and methodological approaches in demonstrating the physiology of organ systems.
NPB 113
Cardiovascular, Respiratory, & Renal Physiology
(NPB 110C or NPB 101);  CHE 008B, PHY 007B and PHY 007C recommended.
Intense and advanced presentation of concepts in cardiovascular, respiratory, and renal physiology including discussion of acid-base balance.
NPB 114
Gastrointestinal Physiology
(NPB 110C or NPB 101);  BIS 105 or BIS 103 recommended, BIS 105 preferred.
Gastrointestinal anatomy and physiology.  Digestion, secretion, absorption, motility, comparative physiology and pathology.  Strong emphasis on neural and hormonal regulation and on cellular mechanisms of secretion and absorption.    
NPB 116
Stress Physiology in Health & Disease
BIS 002A C- or better;  or Consent of Instructor.
Adaptive and maladaptive physiological responses to acute and chronic stress in mammals, with emphasis on humans. Role of endocrine and autonomic nervous system in stress response. Prenatal and postnatal effects of stress on cognitive and affective development. Wellness interventions.
NPB 117
Avian Physiology
(BIS 002A,  BIS 002B);  CHE 002B;  NPB 101 or NPB 110C  strongly recommended.
Physiology of the various systems of birds with emphasis on digestion, respiration, excretion, and endocrine systems.
NPB 121
Physiology of Reproduction
NPB 101 or NPB 110C or ANS 100.
Physiological mechanisms related to reproduction, breeding efficiency and fertility, with special reference to domestic animals.
NPB 121L
Physiology of Reproduction Laboratory
NPB 121 (can be concurrent).
Experiments on the reproductive systems of domestic animals including male and female gametes.
NPB 122
Developmental Endocrinology
NPB 101.Restricted to upper division standing.
Hormonal control of development, maturation and senescence from the cellular to organismal level, with emphasis on the human. Prenatal and neonatal life, childhood and adolescence, adulthood and pregnancy, as well as the endocrinology of aging.
NPB 123
Comparative Vertebrate Organology
(BIS 001A,  BIS 001B) or (BIS 002A,  BIS 002B).
Functional anatomy of major organ systems in vertebrates.  Each system examined from cellular to gross level in fish, birds, and mammals. Emphasis on how differentiated cell types are integrated into tissues and organs to perform diverse physiological functions.
NPB 124
Comparative Neuroanatomy
NPB 101 or NPB 100 or NPB 110B or PSC 121.
Overview of the neuroanatomy in mammalian vertebrates, focusing on the cerebral cortex and experimental techniques. Examine changes or modifications to neural structures as a result of morphological or behavioral specializations.
NPB 124L
Comparative Neuroanatomy Laboratory
NPB 124 (can be concurrent).Pass One restricted to PSC and NPB majors; must be concurrently enrolled in NPB 124.
Comparative neuroanatomy laboratory illustrating modern neuroanatomical techniques in determining neural connections within the mammalian brain. Includes experimentation and presentation of results.
NPB 126
Comparative Physiology: Sensory Systems
NPB 100 or NPB 101.
Basic physiological mechanisms involved in sensory systems. Comparative approach to considerations of mechanosensitive systems (audition, lateral lines, touch, echolocation, equilibrium), chemosensitive systems (olfaction, taste, pheromones), photosensitive systems (vision, infrared detection, UV detection), electroreception, and pain. Emphasis on receptors.
NPB 128
Comparative Physiology: Endrocrinology
NPB 101.
Comparison of physiological functions in the animal kingdom: animal hormones and their functions.
NPB 130
Physiology of the Endocrine Glands
NPB 110C or NPB 101.
Advanced presentation of concepts in endocrinology with emphasis on the role of hormones in reproduction, metabolism, and disease.
NPB 130
Physiology of the Endocrine Glands
(ANS 100 or NPB 101 or NPB 110C).
Advanced presentation of concepts in endocrinology with emphasis on the role of hormones in reproduction, metabolism, and disease.
NPB 132
Nature vs. Nurture: Physiological Interactions Among Genes, Nutrients & Health
BIS 001A or BIS 002A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Biochemical, physiological, genetic, and nutritional causes of important medical problems such as obesity, anorexia, heart disease and diabetes.
NPB 133
Genes & the Brain
NPB 110B or NPB 100;  or Consent of Instructor.  BIS 101 recommended.
Genetic contributions to brain evolution, development and disorders. Topics include evolution of genomic programs of neurodevelopment and the role of genetics in autism, intellectual disability, and schizophrenia.
NPB 134
General Immunology for Physiologists
NPB 101 C- or better or NPB 110C C- or better;  or Consent of Instructor.
Immunology for undergrads interested in physiology aimed at understanding the physiological role of immune responses. Illustrated with examples of human diseases including diabetes, allergies and asthma, and emerging diseases such as Ebola and Zika.
NPB 139
Frontiers in Physiology
NPB 100;  NPB 101;  NPB 102 (can be concurrent).
Lectures by leading authorities and discussion of the latest research in newly emerging areas in physiology. Offered every fourth year.
NPB 140
Principles of Environmental Physiology
NPB 101 or NPB 110C;  BIS 102 recommended.
Physiological aspects of interactions of organisms and environmental, cellular, system, and organismal levels. Emphasis on regulatory responses/mechanisms to thermal, pressure, gravity and light environmental variables.
NPB 141
Physiological Adaptation of Marine Organisms
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing; residence at Bodega Marine Laboratory required.Students must submit application available at http://www.bml.ucdavis.edu.
Physiological adaptation to the environment among organisms in marine and estuarine habitats.
NPB 141P
Physiological Adaptation of Marine Organisms/Advanced Laboratory Topics
NPB 141 (can be concurrent);  Residence at Bodega Marine Laboratory required; NPB 141 required concurrently.Students must submit application available at http://www.bml.ucdavis.edu.
Training in scientific research from hypothesis to publication, including methods of library research. Research related to a topic covered in NPB 141.  
NPB 142
Environmental Endocrinology: Mechanisms for Life Cycles
BIS 002A;  BIS 002B;  BIS 002C.
Effects of environmental factors on endocrine responses that affect vertebrate life history and fitness. Introduction to finite state machine theory and allostasis in life histories and coping strategies. Focus on life history stages including non-breeding, hibernation, reproduction, migration and moult.
NPB 150
Advanced Animal Behavior
NPB 102 or PSC 101;  or Consent of Instructor.
Advanced integrative survey of biological principles of behavioral organization, emphasizing historical roots, current research directions, conceptual issues and controversies. Laboratory exercises on the description and analysis of the behavior of captive and free-living animals.
NPB 152
Hormones & Behavior
(NPB 101 or NPB 110C);  (NPB 102 or PSC 101).
Endocrine physiology with an emphasis on the principles of behavior. Fundamental relationships between hormones and various behaviors engaged in by the organism during its lifetime. Role of hormones in behavioral homeostasis, social behavior, reproductive behavior, parental behavior, adaptation to stress.
NPB 157
Advanced Physiology of Animal/Human Disease
NPB 101 B+ or better or NPB 110C B+ or better;  Consent of Instructor.Limited to 35 students initially.
Centers on fundamental mechanisms and pathophysiological basis for animal and human diseases. Case-based and uses animal and human diseases to help exemplify the physiological consequences of organ dysfunction.
NPB 159
Frontiers in Behavior
(NPB 100,  NPB 101,  NPB 102) or (NPB 110A,  NPB 110B,  NPB 110C).
Lectures by leading authorities and discussion of the latest research in newly emerging areas in behavioral biology. Offered every fourth year.
NPB 161
Developmental Neurobiology 
NPB 100 or NPB 101 or NPB 110B.
Issues, theoretical concepts, and methodologies in developmental neurobiology. Topics include prenatal and postnatal differentiation of neurons, and plasticity in the mature and aging brain. Integration of neurochemical, structural, physiological and behavioral perspectives.
NPB 162
Neural Mechanisms of Behavior
NPB 100 or NPB 101 or NPB 110B.
Relationship between brain and behavior. Identification and analysis of the relevant neural circuits involved. Examples of systems to be considered are birdsong, locomotion, echolocation.
NPB 163
Systems Neuroscience
NPB 100 or NPB 110B;  Or equivalent basic neuroscience training with consent of instructor.
Concepts and techniques in systems neuroscience: e.g., measuring and manipulating neural activity, structure of neocortex, sensory processing, motor control, storage of information, neural codes, neural mechanisms underlying cognitive functions.
NPB 164
Mammalian Vision
NPB 100 or NPB 110B or PSC 101.
Structure and function of the mammalian visual system, from the formation of images on the retina through visually guided behavior and perception. Emphasis on biological mechanisms underlying vision.
NPB 165
Neurobiology of Speech Perception
NPB 110B or NPB 100 or NPB 101;  or Consent of Instructor.
Interdisciplinary approach to speech perception with emphasis on functional neuroanatomy and behavior. Topics include auditory processing in time and space, intelligibility in noisy environments, visual speech, evolution of vocal communication, models of speech perception, development, and hearing impairment.
NPB 166
Math Tools for Neuroscience
(NPB 100 or NPB 110B);  (MAT 016A,  MAT 016B,  MAT 016C) or (MAT 017A,  MAT 017B,  MAT 017C) or (MAT 021A,  MAT 021B,  MAT 021C);  or Consent of Instructor.
Introduction to mathematics techniques used in neuroscience. Applications to neuroscience of differential equations, linear algebra, Fourier transforms, correlation and convolution, and probability theory.  
NPB 167
Computational Neuroscience
(NPB 100 or NPB 110B);  (MAT 016A,  MAT 016B,  MAT 016C) or (MAT 017A,  MAT 017B,  MAT 017C) or (MAT 021A,  MAT 021B,  MAT 021C);  or Consent of Instructor.  PHY 007A, PHY 007B or equivalent recommended.
Mathematical models and data analysis techniques used to describe computations performed by nervous systems. Lecture topics include single neuron biophysics, neural coding, network dynamics, memory, plasticity, and learning. Lab topics include programming mathematical models and data analysis techniques in MATLAB.
NPB 168
Neurobiology of Addictive Drugs
NPB 100 or NPB 110B or NPB 110C or NPB 101;  Or equivalents.
Neurobiological basis for the effects and mechanisms of action of drugs with addictive potential, including opiates (morphine, heroin, methadone), amphetamines, cocaine, nicotine, marijuana (cannabinoids), alcohol, caffeine, and mind-altering drugs such as LSD and antidepressants.
NPB 169
Frontiers in Neurobiology
NPB 100;  NPB 101;  NPB 102 (can be concurrent).
Lectures by leading authorities and discussion of the latest research in newly emerging areas in neurobiology. Offered every fourth year.
NPB 171
Physiology of Neuroimmune Interactions
BIS 002A;  (NPB 012 (can be concurrent) or NPB 100 (can be concurrent) or NPB 110B (can be concurrent));  or Consent of Instructor.  Completion of PMI 126 or MMI 188 recommended prior to this course.
Explores the complex interactions of the nervous and immune systems, and examine how the systems function together to serve homeostasis, behavior, and disease (such as Alzheimer's, autism, and multiple sclerosis).
NPB 172
Map Formation in the Brain
NPB 100 C- or better or NPB 110B C- or better;  or equivalent basic neuroscience training with consent of instructor.
Topographic map connection is a fundamental principle for establishing neural network in the brain. Provides comprehensive understanding of the current concepts of map formation in various sensory and motor nervous systems.
NPB 173
Neurobiology of Brain Disorders
NPB 110B or NPB 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Examination of brain disorders from a basic science perspective to gain insights into the mechanisms of their action. Genetic, molecular, cellular, circuit, and environmental basis of a variety of brain disorders. How insights about underlying mechanisms may lead to the development of improved therapies.
NPB 190C
Research Conference
NPB 199 (can be concurrent);  and Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing in Neurobiology, Physiology, and Behavior or related biological science; NPB 199 required concurrently.
Research findings and methods in neurobiology, physiology, and/or behavior. Presentation and discussion of research by faculty and students.
NPB 192
Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of 84 units.
Work experience off and on campus in all subject areas offered in neurobiology, physiology, & behavior.
NPB 194HA
Neurobiology, Physiology, & Behavior: Honors
Senior standing; minimum 3.500 GPA in courses counted toward major; approval by the master advisor.
Honors project in Neurobiology, Physiology, and Behavior. Laboratory research on a specific question. Project is developed with the sponsoring faculty member and approved by the students Honors Thesis Committee. Honors thesis to be submitted upon completion of the project.
NPB 194HB
Neurobiology, Physiology & Behavior: Honors
Senior standing; minimum 3.500 GPA in courses counted toward major; approval by the master advisor.
Honors project in Neurobiology, Physiology, and Behavior. Laboratory research on a specific question. Project is developed with the sponsoring faculty member and approved by the students Honors Thesis Committee. Honors thesis to be submitted upon completion of the project.
NPB 194HC
Neurobiology, Physiology, & Behavior: Honors
Senior standing; minimum 3.500 GPA in courses counted toward major; approval by the master advisor.
Honors project in Neurobiology, Physiology, and Behavior. Laboratory research on a specific question. Project is developed with the sponsoring faculty member and approved by the students Honors Thesis Committee. Honors thesis to be submitted upon completion of the project.
NPB 197T
Tutoring in Neurobiology, Physiology, & Behavior
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Assisting the instructor by tutoring students in one of the Department's regular courses.
NPB 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

NPB 211
Advanced Topics in Neuroimaging
PSC 210;  or Consent of Instructor.Restricted to 16 students.
Critical presentation and discussion of the most influential advanced issues in neuroimaging, emphasizing fMRI design/analysis and the integration of fMRI with EEG/MEG.
NPB 212
Light & Fluorescence Microscopy
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to 16 students.
Theory and practical application of light and fluorescence microscopy in the biological sciences. Laboratory component focuses on an optics bench, where we build simple compound and confocal microscopes on an optical rail.
NPB 217
Advanced Avian Physiology
NPB 117;  and Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing; NPB 117 required concurrently.
Study in depth of a topic in avian physiology through development of a lecture with associated instructional materials such as lesson plan, readings, presentation, and evaluation aids.
NPB 222
Systems Neuroscience
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Integrative and information-processing aspects of nervous system organization.  Topics include sensory systems, motor function, sensorimotor integration, the limbic system, and the neurobiology of learning and memory.
NPB 245
Computational Models of Cellular Signaling
Consent of Instructor.
Computational and mathematical techniques in modeling of regulatory and signaling phenomena in neurobiology and cell physiology, focusing on linear and nonlinear ordinary differential equation models. Applications include ion channel kinetics, electrical activity, signal transduction, calcium oscillations, and simple neural circuits.
NPB 247
Topics in Functional Neurogenomics
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
The theory, methods and principles of functional neurogenomics with emphasis on the relationship to molecular mechanisms involved in development and disease of the nervous system.
NPB 261A
Topics in Vision: Eyes & Retinal Mechanisms
NPB 100 or NPB 112;  Or the equivalent; graduate standing.
Structure and function of the visual system, with emphasis on the eye and retina, including optics, anatomy, transduction, retinal synapses, adaptation, and parallel processing.
NPB 261B
Topics in Vision: Systems, Psychophysics, Computational Models
Consent of Instructor.  NPB 261A recommended.
Functions of the central visual pathways and their underlying mechanisms.  Recent research on aspects of anatomy, biochemistry, electrophysiology, psychophysics, development, and genetics of the visual system.
NPB 261C
Topics in Vision: Clinical Vision Science
NPB 261A;  NPB 261B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Causes and mechanistic bases of major blinding diseases.  Recent research on aspects of anatomy, biochemistry, electrophysiology, psychophysics, development, and genetics of the visual system related to disease.
NPB 263
Modeling in Systems Neuroscience
Consent of Instructor.
Modeling as a tool in systems neuroscience. Mathematical techniques will be introduced and used to explore advanced topics in echolocation, sound localization, electroreception, communications, and motor systems. Other topics include transforms, modeling assumptions, scales and linearity.
NPB 267
Computational Neuroscience
One course in general Neuroscience at the level of NPB 100 or NPB 110B; one year college-level Calculus at the level of MAT 016A, MAT 016B, MAT 016C or higher; one year Physics at the level of PHY 007A, PHY 007B, PHY 007C recommended; or Consent of Instructor.
Mathematical models and data analysis techniques used to describe computations performed by nervous systems. Lecture topics include single-neuron biophysics, neural coding, network dynamics, memory, plasticity, and learning. Lab topics include programming mathematical models and data analysis techniques in MATLAB.
NPB 270
How to Write a Fundable Grant Proposal in the Biomedical Sciences
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to members of the Neuroscience and BMCDB graduate groups; graduate students in other biomedical programs may enroll with instructor permission.
Teaches the dos and donts of writing grants in the biomedical sciences and the mechanisms of the review process.  
NPB 271A
Core Concepts & Methods in Learning, Memory, & Plasticity
Graduate Standing or Consent of Instructor.
Core concepts and methods used in studies of learning, memory and plasticity. Behavioral paradigms and measurement approaches in human and animal studies of learning and plasticity, as well as a consideration of the functional, anatomical and neuronal mechanisms underlying brain plasticity.
NPB 271B
Core Concepts & Methods in Learning, Memory, & Plasticity
NPB 271A or NSC 271A or PSC 271A.
Core concepts and detailed survey methods used in studies of learning, memory and plasticity, from the cellular and molecular level to the level of neural circuits. Areas of learning, memory, and plasticity research where recent progress has been made in linking across these levels of analysis.
NPB 271C
Translational Approaches to Learning, Memory, & Plasticity Disorders
NPB 271B or NSC 271B or PSC 271B.
Neurological disorders, the effect of these disorders on learning, memory and plasticity, approved therapeutic options and current research designed to improve understanding and treatment of these diseases: (i) the clinical presentation, diagnostic criteria, and existing therapies, (ii) mechanistic studies in humans and animal models, and (iii) molecular pathways involved in the disease and approaches for drug discovery. 
NPB 287A
Topics in Theoretical Neuroscience
Consent of Instructor.
In-depth exploration of topics in theoretical neuroscience. Topic varies each year. Fall quarter (287A): foundational material from books and review articles. Spring quarter (287B): continuation of year's topic through readings of seminal articles from the primary literature.
NPB 287B
Topics in Theoretical Neuroscience
Consent of Instructor.
In-depth exploration of topics in theoretical neuroscience. Topic varies each year. Fall quarter (287A): foundational material from books and review articles.  Spring quarter (287B): continuation of year's topic through readings of seminal articles from the primary literature.
NPB 291
Auditory Neuroscience
NPB 100 or NPB 112 or NSC 222;  Or the equivalent.
Exploration of various important aspects of auditory physiology, behavior and psychophysics through review of original literature. New topic each quarter.
NRS 201
Health Status & Care Systems
Current enrollment in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership graduate program or consent of instructor.
Comparative health status data, major current health issues globally, nationally, regionally. Theoretical perspectives on social, political, economic determinants of health. Health-care systems examined, linked to data, and evaluated in regards to outcomes. Aging, rural, ethnic minority populations highlighted.
NRS 202
Implementation Science
Current enrollment in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership graduate program or consent of instructor.
Change processes in health care from political, historic, economic and sociologic frameworks. Historic and current examples of transformative change in the health-care system. Skills for system transformation through health policy, practice, research and education are emphasized. 
NRS 203
Leadership in Health Care
Current enrollment in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership graduate program or consent of instructor.
Critical examination of leadership from a variety of theoretical and philosophical perspectives and focuses on specific challenges in health care and leadership at various levels, e.g., patient, organizational, and policy levels.
NRS 204
Research Skills for Nursing Science & Health-Care Leadership
Current enrollment in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership graduate program or consent of instructor.
Foundation for analyzing research, health, and systems data to answer clinical, systems, or policy questions. Use and examine multiple sources of data and information as a basis for planned change and transformation in health care.
NRS 205
Research Design in Nursing & Health Care
Current enrollment in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership graduate program or consent of instructor.
Major types of quantitative and qualitative research design and their application to nursing and health-care research. Implications of choosing alternative research designs and critical analysis of philosophical underpinnings. Evaluation of control and validity, sampling, instruments to measure health concepts.
NRS 205A
Overview of Research in Nursing Science & Health Care
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor. 
Provides an overview of quantitative and qualitative paradigms in scientific inquiry and the major designs related to each paradigm. First of a three-course series on research design and methods in nursing science and healthcare research.
NRS 205B
Quantitative Research in Nursing Science & Health Care
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor. 
Introduces principles of quantitative data collection and analysis as applied to major study designs in nursing and health-care research. Provides a basic foundation for producing, interpreting, and applying quantitative research findings to answer clinical, system, and policy questions.
NRS 205C
Qualitative Research in Nursing Science & Health Care
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to current Ph.D. students in NSHL program or consent of instructor.
Introduces principles of qualitative data collection and analysis as applied to major study designs in nursing and health-care research. Provides a basic foundation for producing, interpreting, and applying qualitative research findings to answer clinical, system, and policy questions.
NRS 206
Community Connections
Current enrollment in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership graduate program or consent of instructor.Open to NSHL MS students only.
Community-based learning and experiences including community participation, assessment, data collection and analysis using multiple approaches, community health improvement projects, collaborative leadership practice, all with the guidance of community members and nursing faculty.
NRS 210Y
Applied Health Informatics
Consent of Instructor.Open to current student in NSHL graduate programs or consent of instructor.
Within the conceptual framework of the Foundation of Knowledge model, integrates nursing science, information science, computer science and cognitive science to acquire, process, generate and disseminate knowledge.
NRS 211Y
Rural Health
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor. 
Interprofessional graduate course provides an introduction to rural health theory, research, policy, and practice, with an emphasis on rural health assets and disparities. 
NRS 212
Technology & Innovations in Health Care 
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Group or by consent of the instructor.
Multidisciplinary approach to stimulate new thinking in the practice, process, and delivery of health care. Focus on improving overall health outcomes.
NRS 213
Race & Health in the United States
Consent of Instructor.Open to all Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership graduate students or consent of instructor only. 
Race as a social construct and unequal health care distribution in the United States. Practical health care leadership to end racial inequalities in health.
NRS 220
Social, Cultural, & Behavioral Determinants of Health 
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Group or by consent of the instructor. 
Effects of globalization, political systems, local and global economies, culture, race, class, gender, and sexuality on population health.
NRS 221
Biophysical Concepts in Nursing
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Group or by consent of the instructor. 
Pathophysiological processes that contribute to different disease states across the lifespan; case studies; selective clinical decisions using current, reliable sources of pathophysiology information.
NRS 222A
Research Quality Improvement & Evidence Based Practice 
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Group or by consent of the instructor. 
Introduction to providing safe, competent and compassionate care in a highly technical and digital environment. Emphasis on safety, quality and research to clinical practice. Accessing and analyzing reliable sources of evidence for integration in care-plan. 
NRS 222B
Research Quality Improvement & Evidence Based Practice 
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Group or by consent of the instructor. 
Introduction to providing safe, competent and compassionate care in a highly technical and digital environment. Emphasis on safety, quality and research to clinical practice. Accessing and analyzing reliable sources of evidence for integration in care-plan.
NRS 223
Quality & Safety Education in Health Care 
NRS 221;  NRS 272;  NRS 273;  NRS 420;  NRS 421;  NRS 422;  NRS 423;  NRS 425;  Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Group or by consent of the instructor. 
Implementing best practices alongside technological tools and focusing on continuous quality improvement. Emphasis on providing safe, competent care in a highly technical and digital environment. Building capacity to apply concepts related to safety, quality and research to clinical practice.
NRS 224
Developing Future Nurse Leaders 
NRS 221;  NRS 223;  NRS 272;  NRS 273;  NRS 420;  NRS 421;  NRS 422;  NRS 423;  NRS 425;  NRS 426;  Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Group or by consent of the instructor. 
Develop skills around effective decision making, fiscal and environmental stewardship, initiating and maintaining effective working relationships, using mutually respectful communication and collaboration, care coordination, delegation and supervision. Emphasis on conflict resolution, leadership and interprofessional teamwork.
NRS 225
Professional Nursing Role Formation 
NRS 202;  NRS 203;  NRS 212;  NRS 220;  NRS 221;  NRS 222A;  NRS 222B;  NRS 223;  NRS 224;  NRS 272;  NRS 273;  NRS 420;  NRS 421;  NRS 422;  NRS 423;  NRS 424;  NRS 425;  NRS 426;  NRS 427;  NRS 429A;  NRS 429B;  NRS 429C;  NRS 429D;  NRS 429E;  Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Group or by consent of the instructor. 
Transition from nursing student to professional nurse. Focus on ethical comportment, professional values of social justice, autonomy, advocacy, altruism, human dignity, and integrity. Students must pass a mastery exit examination and complete a capstone project. 
NRS 242A
Implementation Science for Clinicians
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor. 
Focuses on identification of relevant research or improvement questions specific to patient care and evaluating the pertinent research literature related to the implementation of evidence based care. First of a three-course series.
NRS 242B
Implementation Science for Clinicians
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor.
Continuation of NRS 242A. Implementation Science for Clinicians, with a focus on implementing and evaluating a change.
NRS 242C
Implementation Science for Clinicians
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor. 
Advanced skills in application of implementation science into systems based practice and incorporating quality improvement and patient safety knowledge with particular focus on prevention of medical errors. 
NRS 243A
Leadership in Professional Practice
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor. 
Critical examination of leadership using theoretical and philosophical perspectives with an applied approach applicable to clinical practice. Three-course series conducted across the first, third and eighth quarters.  
NRS 243B
Leadership in Professional Practice
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor.
Introduces professional role topics including history of the profession, the role in interprofessional teams and the health care system, transitioning to the role from other health professions, scope of practice, certification and licensure and professional organizations.
NRS 243C
Leadership in Professional Practice
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor. 
Expands upon the leadership role as it relates to their clinical practice and professional role. Professional role topics including: transitioning from student to practicing professional, scope of practice, the physician relationship, and more advanced concepts in ethics.
NRS 250
Foundations of Primary Health Care
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor. 
Designed to promote the understanding and clinical application of human anatomy, physiology, histology, immunology and pathology.
NRS 251A
Primary Health Care
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor. 
Introduction to primary health care concepts essential to the care of common medical problems seen in primary care settings. Module content will focus on various organ systems and specialty areas.
NRS 251B
Foundations of Primary Health Care
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor. 
Introduction to primary health care concepts essential to the care of common medical problems seen in primary care settings.  
NRS 251C
Primary Heath Care
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor. 
Introduction to primary health care concepts essential to the care of common medical problems seen in primary care settings.  
NRS 251D
Primary Heath Care
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor. 
Introduction to primary health care concepts essential to the care of common medical problems seen in primary care settings.
NRS 260
Foundations of Behavioral Health
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor.
Focuses on the spectrum of normal psychological development over the lifespan for children, adults and elders. Theories of stress and coping mechanism are presented as a framework for the assessment of individuals. 
NRS 270
Foundations of Pharmacology
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor.
Introduction to the major concepts in pharmacology and relevant human physiology related to pharmacotherapeutics and toxicology.
NRS 271A
Pharmacology
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor. 
Systems based pharmacology focused on classes of drugs used to treat disorders in specialty systems.
NRS 271B
Pharmacology
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor.
Systems based pharmacology focused on classes of drugs used to treat disorders in specialty systems. 
NRS 271C
Pharmacology
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor.
Systems based pharmacology focused on classes of drugs used to treat disorders in specialty systems. 
NRS 272
Foundations of Pharmacology 
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Group or by consent of the instructor. 
Theoretical background to providing safe and effective care related to drugs and natural products.
NRS 273
Pharmacology Concepts in Nursing 
NRS 221;  NRS 272;  NRS 420;  NRS 421;  Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Group or by consent of the instructor. 
Application of principles for safe and effective use of medications and natural products; use of current, reliable information to make clinical decisions.
NRS 290
Master's Seminar
Current enrollment in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership graduate program or consent of instructor.Open to NSHL MS students only or by consent of course instructor.
Subject varies from quarter to quarter. Current knowledge and issues relevant to one of two fields of emphasis: population health or health systems.
NRS 291
Doctoral Seminar
Current enrollment in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership graduate program or consent of instructor.
Focus on the theory, research and knowledge relevant to one of two fields of emphasis: population health or health systems. Emphasis placed on reading, critique and synthesis of classic and cutting-edge research in nursing and health care. 
NRS 291D
Doctoral Seminar
Current enrollment in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership graduate program or consent of instructor.
Focus on the theory, research and knowledge relevant to one of two fields of emphasis: population health or health systems. Emphasis placed on reading, critique and synthesis of classic and cutting-edge research in nursing and health care. 
NRS 298
Special Topics in Nursing Science & Health-Care Leadership
Current enrollment in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership graduate program or consent of instructor.
In-depth study of topics in Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership, selected from: policy and politics in health care, health-care disparities, current issues in health care, approaches to the conduct of science, or other related areas, with year to year variation.
NRS 298V
Online Special Topics in Nursing Science & Health-Care Leadership
Current enrollment in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership graduate program or consent of instructor.
In-depth study of topics in Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership, selected from: policy and politics in health care, health-care disparities, current issues in health care, approaches to the conduct of science, or other related areas, with year to year variation.
NRS 299
Research & Writing
Consent of Instructor.
Students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership graduate programs conduct research and writing under the supervision of a faculty member.
NRS 299D
Dissertation Research & Writing
Consent of Instructor.
Students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership graduate programs conduct dissertation research and writing under the supervision of a faculty member.
NRS 301
Learner Centered Teaching
Consent of Instructor.Open to current students in the Nursing Science and Health-care Leadership graduate programs; outside students with prior educational or work experience in education may register for this class with the consent of instructor.
Students will explore best practices in learner-centered teaching, performance-based curriculum models, instructional design, and assessing/evaluating student learning. Students will have experience in planning learner-centered activities that are engaging and effective in achieving desired student performance. 
NRS 302
Teaching Methods - Use of Emerging Technologies to Improve Student Learning
Consent of Instructor.Open to current students in the Nursing Science and Health-care Leadership graduate programs; outside students with prior educational or work experience in education may register for this class with the consent of instructor.
Students will examine, design and develop instructional strategies that use innovative and emerging technologies to promote motivation, performance and learning in health professions education. Research findings associated with use of various emerging technologies will be examined.
NRS 303
Professional Role Formation
Consent of Instructor.Open to current students in the Nursing Science and Health-care Leadership graduate programs; outside students with prior educational or work experience in education may register for this class with the consent of instructor.
Exploration of the educator role. Topics include Role Expectations, Legal and Regulatory Issues, Professional Ethics, Educational Scholarship, Individual Differences, Learning Environments, and Lifelong Learning. Placements for the optional practicum are arranged in a wide variety of settings.
NRS 306
Nature of Caregiving
Consent of Instructor.
Explores theoretical and conceptual frameworks to enable clinicians to understand the nature of family caregiving. Students examine and apply frameworks in order to conduct comprehensive person and family based assessments and interventions incorporating various dimensions of family caregiving.
NRS 307
Family Centered Communication & Shared Decision Making  
Consent of Instructor.
Incorporates shared decision-making principles and group communication to address family centered care planning and challenging clinical discussions. Targets competencies needed by health professionals to partner effectively to enhance the caregiving experience and reduce negative sequelae over the caregiving trajectory.
NRS 308
Patient & Family Centered Care Plan Development
Consent of Instructor.
Synthesizes assessment data and analyzes impact of technology, individual, family, sociocultural, health care system, and illness-related variables in specific family care-giving situations. Co-create comprehensive evidence based plan to facilitate the health and well-being of the family unit through shared decision-making. 
NRS 400
Basic Clinical Skills
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor. 
Instruction and practice of the fundamental clinical skills necessary for patient care comprise this course with a primary focus on principles of effective communication in establishing the therapeutic provider-patient relationship. 
NRS 401
Basic Clinical Skills
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor.
Continuation of focus on history taking and physical examination skills with advanced/specialized content.  
NRS 410A
Advanced Clinical Skills
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor. 
Continuation of focus on history taking and physical examination skills with advanced/specialized content.  
NRS 410B
Advanced Clinical Skills
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor. 
Continuation of focus on history taking and physical examination skills with advanced/specialized content related specified systems.
NRS 410C
Advanced Clinical Skills
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor.
Continuation of focus on history taking and physical examination skills with advanced/specialized content related specified systems. 
NRS 410D
Advanced Clinical Skills
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor.
Continuation of focus on history taking and physical examination skills with advanced/specialized content related to specified systems. 
NRS 410E
Advanced Clinical Skills
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor.
Continuation of focus on history taking and physical examination skills with advanced/specialized content related to specified systems. 
NRS 410F
Advanced Clinical Skills
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor.
Continuation of focus on history taking and physical examination skills with advanced/specialized content related to specified specialty systems. 
NRS 410G
Advanced Clinical Skills
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor.
Continuation of focus on history taking and physical examination skills with advanced/specialized content related to specified specialty systems. 
NRS 420
Foundations of Clinical Nursing Practice 
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Group or by consent of the instructor. 
Foundational course introduces students to core concepts of clinical nursing, including clinical reasoning, professional ethics, therapeutic communication and activities of daily living. Develop skills for the provision of safe, high quality, culturally-sensitive, person-centered care across the lifespan.
NRS 421
Health Assessment Across the Lifespan 
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Group or by consent of the instructor.
Prepares students to conduct a health history assessment using developmentally and culturally appropriate approaches for individuals across the lifespan. Acquire the knowledge, understanding, and skills needed to perform, interpret and communicate a health history.
NRS 422
Care of Adults with Chronic Conditions 
NRS 221;  NRS 272;  NRS 420;  NRS 421;  Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Group or by consent of the instructor. 
Learn concepts central to the effective management of a variety of common chronic illness and disabling conditions across the lifespan in a variety of different settings. Practice conducting in-depth health assessments of individuals with chronic conditions.
NRS 423
Psychosocial Wellness & Illness 
NRS 221;  NRS 272;  NRS 420;  NRS 421;  Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Group or by consent of the instructor. 
Explore the biological, psychological, cultural, societal, and environmental factors that affect psychological wellness and illness. Practice providing care to individuals and families experiencing disruptions in mental health secondary to physical or psychiatric illness, trauma or loss.
NRS 424
Nursing Care of Older Adults 
NRS 221;  NRS 223;  NRS 272;  NRS 273;  NRS 420;  NRS 421;  NRS 422;  NRS 423;  NRS 425;  NRS 426;  Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Group or by consent of the instructor. 
Build skills for situations involving older adults, such as in the management of complex clinical and administering and interpreting standardized assessment tools. Develop plans of care for older adults experiencing a variety of geriatric syndromes.
NRS 425
Family Focused Nursing 
NRS 221;  NRS 272;  NRS 273;  NRS 420;  NRS 421;  NRS 422;  NRS 423;  Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Group or by consent of the instructor. 
Focuses on family as the unit of nursing and interprofessional care. Includes influences of family on health and illness, reproductive and gender/sexuality issues, pregnancy, birth and child-rearing, and the health and illness in children and youth.
NRS 426
Nursing Care of Adults with Complex Illness or Injury 
NRS 221;  NRS 272;  NRS 273;  NRS 420;  NRS 421;  NRS 422;  NRS 423;  NRS 425;  Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Group or by consent of the instructor. 
Prepares students to provide comprehensive, patient-centered nursing care for patients with acute or complex illness and injury. Theory portion focuses on concepts associated with complex physiological alterations.  
NRS 427
Fostering Healthy Communities 
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Group or by consent of the instructor. 
Focuses on populations & communities, and emphasizes working with diverse communities in providing health promotion, chronic disease management, transitional support and crisis intervention. Develop skills to critically analyze and shape health policy and develop accessible community resources.
NRS 428
Capstone Clinical Nursing Practicum 
NRS 202;  NRS 203;  NRS 212;  NRS 220;  NRS 221;  NRS 222A;  NRS 222B;  NRS 223;  NRS 224;  NRS 272;  NRS 273;  NRS 420;  NRS 421;  NRS 422;  NRS 423;  NRS 424;  NRS 425;  NRS 426;  NRS 427;  NRS 429A;  NRS 429B;  NRS 429C;  NRS 429D;  NRS 429E;  Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Group or by consent of the instructor. 
Practicum experience is designed to facilitate transition to professional practice. Opportunity to choose a clinical practice area of interest and to work with a preceptor with expertise in that area. 
NRS 429A
Collaborative Practice A
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Group or by consent of the instructor. 
Interprofessional course uses experiential learning activities including simulation, role play, and case studies. Concepts include but are not limited to; communication, person-centered care, ethical decision making, end-of-life decisions, culturally appropriate care, quality and safety, social justice, and professionalism.
NRS 429B
Collaborative Practice B
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Group or by consent of the instructor. 
Interprofessional course uses experiential learning activities including simulation, role play, and case studies. Concepts include but are not limited to; communication, person-centered care, ethical decision making, end-of-life decisions, culturally appropriate care, quality and safety, social justice, and professionalism.
NRS 429C
Collaborative Practice C
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Group or by consent of the instructor. 
Interprofessional course uses experiential learning activities including simulation, role play, and case studies. Concepts include but are not limited to; communication, person-centered care, ethical decision making, end-of-life decisions, culturally appropriate care, quality and safety, social justice, and professionalism.
NRS 429D
Collaborative Practice D
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Group or by consent of the instructor. 
Interprofessional course uses experiential learning activities including simulation, role play, and case studies. Concepts include but are not limited to; communication, person-centered care, ethical decision making, end-of-life decisions, culturally appropriate care, quality and safety, social justice, and professionalism.
NRS 429E
Collaborative Practice E
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Group or by consent of the instructor.
Interprofessional course uses experiential learning activities including simulation, role play, and case studies. Concepts include but are not limited to; communication, person-centered care, ethical decision making, end-of-life decisions, culturally appropriate care, quality and safety, social justice, and professionalism.
NRS 429F
Collaborative Practice F
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Group or by consent of the instructor. 
Interprofessional course uses experiential learning activities including simulation, role play, and case studies. Concepts include but are not limited to; communication, person-centered care, ethical decision making, end-of-life decisions, culturally appropriate care, quality and safety, social justice, and professionalism.
NRS 440
Preparation for Clinical Practice
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor. 
Students are placed in clinical settings and/or clinical simulation laboratories to observe and practice the integration of clinical skills with direct supervision by faculty.
NRS 450A
Supervised Clinical Practice-Primary Health Care
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor.
Each of the required primary care rotations is a four-week supervised clinical practice experience in primary care, under the supervision of an appropriate community-based primary care provider per accreditation requirements.
NRS 450B
Supervised Clinical Practice-Primary Health Care
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor. 
Each of the required primary care rotations is a four-week supervised clinical practice experience in primary care, under the supervision of an appropriate community-based primary care provider per accreditation requirements.
NRS 450C
Supervised Clinical Practice-Primary Health Care
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor. 
Each of the required primary care rotations is a four-week supervised clinical practice experience in primary care, under the supervision of an appropriate community-based primary care provider per accreditation requirements.
NRS 450D
Supervised Clinical Practice-Primary Health Care
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor. 
Each of the required primary care rotations is a four-week supervised clinical practice experience in primary care, under the supervision of an appropriate community-based primary care provider per accreditation requirements.
NRS 450E
Supervised Clinical Practice-Primary Health Care
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor. 
Each of the required primary care rotations is a four-week supervised clinical practice experience in primary care, under the supervision of an appropriate community-based primary care provider per accreditation requirements.
NRS 451
Supervised Clinical Practice-Pediatrics
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor. 
Four-week clinical rotation under the supervision of an appropriate community-based Pediatric Medicine provider per accreditation requirements. 
NRS 452
Supervised Clinical Practice-Women's Health
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor. 
Four-week clinical rotation under the supervision of an appropriate community-based womens health and prenatal care provider per accreditation requirements.
NRS 453
Supervised Clinical Practice-Mental Health
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor. 
Four-week clinical rotation under the supervision of an appropriate community-based psychiatrist, psychiatric/mental health provider per accreditation requirements.
NRS 454
Supervised Clinical Practice-Emergency Medicine
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor. 
Four-week clinical rotation under the supervision of an appropriate Emergency Medicine provider per accreditation requirements.
NRS 455
Supervised Clinical Practice-Inpatient Surgery
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor.
Four-week clinical experience under the supervision of an appropriate surgical provider per accreditation requirements. 
NRS 456
Supervised Clinical Practice-Inpatient Medicine
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor. 
Four-week clinical rotation under the supervision of an appropriate inpatient provider per accreditation requirements.
NRS 459
Supervised Clinical Practice-Other Specialties
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor. 
Two four-week selective rotations are available to accommodate student interest and/or accommodate a students clinical deficits identified by the program.  
NRS 470
Health Care Ethics
Consent of Instructor.
Guided independent study of issues in biomedical ethics, with discussion of readings that are based on student interests and needs. Participation in ethics rounds.
NRS 471
Supervised Clinical Practice-Geriatrics
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor. 
Four-week clinical rotation under the supervision of an appropriate community-based Geriatric Medicine provider per accreditation requirements. 
NRS 475
Supervised Clinical Practice-Acute Care
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor. 
Two- to four-week rotation focus on providing acute care in inpatient settings.  Students will work directly with specific inpatient units.    
NRS 480
Supervised Clinical Practice-Rural Health
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor. 
Rural health rotations focus on providing care in medically underserved rural sites. Students will experience care across the continuum in ambulatory, inpatient, and community based settings. 
NRS 490
Supervised Clinical Practice: Quality & Safety
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs or by consent of instructor. 
Clinical rotation that allow students to work directly with patient safety and quality improvement committees in various organizations. 
NRS 493A
Improving Quality in Health Care
Consent of Instructor.Open to Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Students. 
Working in interdisciplinary teams, will explore the theory and practical methods being employed to make improvement in health care systems while providing an opportunity for interprofessional educational experience.
NRS 493B
Improving Quality in Health Care
NRS 493A;  Consent of Instructor.Open to Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Students. 
Working in interdisciplinary teams, will explore advanced theory and practical methods being employed to make improvement in health care systems while providing an opportunity for interprofessional educational experience.
NRS 493C
Enhancing Patient Safety in Health Care
Consent of Instructor.  Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership graduate students.
Inter-professional module is designed to explore the theory and practical methods being employed to improve patient safety in health care while providing an opportunity for inter-professional educational experience.
NSC 200LA
Laboratory Methods in Neurobiology
Graduate standing in the Neuroscience Graduate Group.
Individual research in the laboratory of a faculty member. Research problems emphasize the use of contemporary methods and good experimental design.
NSC 200LB
Laboratory Methods in Neurobiology
Graduate standing in the Neuroscience Graduate Group.
Individual research in the laboratory of a faculty member. Research problems emphasize the use of contemporary methods and good experimental design.
NSC 201
Neuroanatomy
Consent of Instructor.
Mix of lectures, demonstrations, and dissections, emphasizing functional significance of neuroanatomy from a biological perspective, with comparisons between human and non-human brains. Emphasis placed on functional anatomy of the nervous system, integrated with cellular, molecular, cognitive, and developmental concepts.   
NSC 211
Advaced Topics in Neuroimaging
PSC 210;  or Consent of Instructor.Restricted to 16 students.
Critical presentation and discussion of the most influential advanced issues in neuroimaging, emphasizing fMRI design/analysis and the integration of fMRI with EEG/MEG.
NSC 219
Design to Data: Statistics for Modern Neuroscience
graduate student standing in neuroscience or related discipline or consent of instructor.
Statistical methods and applications for neuroscience. Quantitative foundations covering key concepts, methods, and applications, from descriptive analysis through data science. Statistical considerations in experimental design, analysis and statistical testing in hypothesis and data-driven contexts, and responsible conduct of research in the acquisition, storage, analysis, and presentation of scientific data
NSC 220
How to Give a Scientific Seminar
Consent of Instructor.
Presentation of effective seminars. Student presentations of selected neuroscience topics in seminar format. Must be taken in two consecutive quarters.
NSC 221
Cellular Neurophysiology
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Physiological aspects of cellular and subcellular organization of the nervous system. Neuronal cell biology, the structure and function of ion channels, electrical excitability, signaling cascades, sensory transduction and, mechanisms of synaptic transmission, and the cellular basis of learning and memory.
NSC 222
Systems Neuroscience
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Integrative and information-processing aspects of nervous system organization. Topics include sensory systems, motor function, sensorimotor integration, the limbic system, and the neurobiology of learning and memory.
NSC 223
Cognitive Neuroscience
Graduate student standing in Psychology or Neuroscience or consent of instructor.
Graduate core course for neuroscience. Neurobiological bases of higher mental function including attention, memory, language. One of three in three-quarter sequence.
NSC 224A
Molecular & Developmental Neurobiology
Consent of Instructor.
Key issues in developmental and molecular neurobiology. Discussion emphasis on critical evaluation of the experiments and methods described in research papers. Readings of seminal, primary research papers, reviews, and book chapters. Reading materials will be distributed one week in advance. 
NSC 224B
Molecular & Developmental Neurobiology
NSC 224A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Continuation of NSC 224A. Key issues in developmental and molecular neurobiology, focusing on developmental topics. Discussion emphasis on critical evaluation of experiments and methods described in associated literature.
NSC 225
Translational Research in the Neurobiology of Disease
NSC 221 (can be concurrent);  NSC 222 (can be concurrent);  NSC 223 (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.  Past or concurrent enrollment in NSC 221 & NSC 222 & NSC 223.
Provides an overview of major neuropsychiatric and neurological disorders from both the clinical and fundamental science perspectives.  
NSC 226
Molecular & Developmental Neurobiology
Consent of Instructor.
Introduction to molecular and developmental neurobiology for graduate students. Topics will range from neurulation to development of sensory systems and will include modern molecular methods and their application in developmental neuroscience.
NSC 226
Molecular & Developmental Neurobiology
Consent of Instructor.
Key issues in developmental and molecular neurobiology. Topics include neural induction and patterning, neurogenesis, axon guidance, synapse development and remodeling. Discussion emphasis on critical evaluation of the experiments and methods described in primary seminal research papers and current literature. 
NSC 243
Topics in Cellular & Behavioral Neurobiology
Consent of Instructor.
An advanced examination of several currrent problems in neurobiology. Topics vary in different years.
NSC 247
Topics in Functional Neurogenomics
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
The theory, methods and principles of functional neurogenomics with emphasis on the relationship to molecular mechanisms involved in development and disease of the nervous system.
NSC 250
Biology of Neuroglia
Consent of Instructor.
The properties and functions of non-neuronal or neuroglial cells in the mammalian central nervous system with relevance to neuronal development, physiology and injury response.
NSC 261A
Topics in Vision: Eyes & Retinal Mechanisms
NPB 100 or NPB 112;  Or the equivalent; graduate standing.
Structure and function of the visual system, with emphasis on the eye and retina, including optics, anatomy, transduction, retinal synapses, adaptation, and parallel processing.
NSC 261B
Topics in Vision: Systems, Psychophysics, Computational Models
Consent of Instructor.  NSC 261A recommended.
Functions of the central visual pathways and their underlying mechanisms.  Recent research on aspects of anatomy, biochemistry, electrophysiology, psychophysics, development, and genetics of the visual system.
NSC 261C
Topics in Vision: Clinical Vision Science
NSC 261A;  NSC 261B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Causes and mechanistic bases of major blinding diseases.  Recent research on aspects of anatomy, biochemistry, electrophysiology, psychophysics, development, and genetics of the visual system related to disease.
NSC 267
Computational Neuroscience
Consent of Instructor.  One course in general Neuroscience at the level of NSC 100; or NPB 110B; one year college-level Calculus at level of MAT 016A, MAT 016B, MAT 016C or higher; one year Physics at the level of PHY 007A, PHY 007B, PHY 007C, recommended; or Consent of Instructor.
Mathematical models and data analysis techniques used to describe computations performed by nervous systems. Lecture topics include single neuron biophysics, neural coding, network dynamics, memory, plasticity, and learning. Lab topics include programming mathematical models and data analysis techniques in MATLAB.
NSC 270
How to Write a Fundable Grant Proposal in the Biomedical Sciences
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to members of the Neuroscience and BMCDB graduate groups; graduate students in other biomedical programs may enroll with instructor permission.
Teaches the do's and don'ts of writing grants in the biomedical sciences and the mechanisms of the review process.
NSC 271A
Core Concepts & Methods in Learning, Memory, & Plasticity
Graduate Standing or Consent of Instructor.
Core concepts and methods used in studies of learning, memory and plasticity. Behavioral paradigms and measurement approaches in human and animal studies of learning and plasticity, as well as a consideration of the functional, anatomical and neuronal mechanisms underlying brain plasticity. 
NSC 271B
Core Concepts & Methods in Learning, Memory, & Plasticity
NSC 271A or NPB 271A or PSC 271A.
Core concepts and detailed survey methods used in studies of learning, memory and plasticity, from the cellular and molecular level to the level of neural circuits. Areas of learning, memory, and plasticity research where recent progress has been made in linking across these levels of analysis.
NSC 271C
Translational Approaches to Learning, Memory, & Plasticity Disorders
NSC 271B or NPB 271B or PSC 271B.
Neurological disorders, the effect of these disorders on learning, memory and plasticity, approved therapeutic options and current research designed to improve understanding and treatment of these diseases: (i) the clinical presentation, diagnostic criteria, and existing therapies, (ii) mechanistic studies in humans and animal models, and (iii) molecular pathways involved in the disease and approaches for drug discovery.
NSC 283
Neurobiological Literature
Consent of Instructor.
Critical presentation and analysis of recent journal articles in neurobiology.
NSC 284
Development of Sensory Systems
Consent of Instructor.
Presentation and discussion of recent literature on the development of sensory systems.
NSC 287A
Topics in Theoretical Neuroscience
Consent of Instructor.
In-depth exploration of topics in theoretical neuroscience. Topic varies each year. Fall quarter (287A): foundational material from books and review articles. Spring quarter (287B): continuation of year's topic through readings of seminal articles from the primary literature.
NSC 287B
Topics in Theoretical Neuroscience
Consent of Instructor.
In-depth exploration of topics in theoretical neuroscience. Topic varies each year. Fall quarter (287A): foundational material from books and review articles.  Spring quarter (287B): continuation of year's topic through readings of seminal articles from the primary literature.
NSC 290C
Research Conference in Neurobiology
NSC 299 (can be concurrent);  Graduate standing in Neuroscience or consent of instructor; NSC 299 required concurrently.
Presentation and discussion of faculty and graduate student research in neurobiology.
NSC 292
Cortical Plasticity & Perception
NPB 100 or NPB 112;  Or equivalent or consent of instructor.
Examination of research articles on cortical plasticity and changes in perception. Examples drawn from studies of the somatosensory, visual, auditory, and motor cortex.
NSC 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

NSC 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.

NSU 199
Special Study in Neurosurgery for Advanced Undergraduates
Advanced undergraduate standing with consent of instructor.
Students may participate in ongoing neurosurgical projects or may pursue and design independent projects.
NSU 299
Neurosurgery Research
Graduate student with consent of instructor.
Student may participate in ongoing neurosurgical projects or may pursue and design independent projects.
NSU 451
Neurosurgical Critical Care Clerkship
Third- or fourth-year medical student having completed a neurosurgical clerkship or consent of instructor.
Students participate in the care of neurosurgical patients in the NSICU and in the admission and surgical management of patients admitted through the Emergency Room.
NSU 455
Clinical Pediatric Neurosurgery
NSU 460;  and Consent of Instructor.  Third- or fourth-year medical students.
Admission and follow-up of pediatric patients. Neurological history, examination, and diagnostic procedures are emphasized. Students will participate in surgical procedures and are required to attend all pediatric neurosurgery conferences.
NSU 460
Clinical Neurosurgery
Consent of Instructor.  Third- and fourth-year medical students.
Approved for graduate degree credit. Admission and follow-up of patients. Neurological history, examination and further diagnostic procedures emphasized. Students participate in meaningful aspects of surgical procedures and attend listed conferences, rounds, and seminars.
NSU 464
Externship
Fourth-year medical student having completed a neurosurgical clerkship or consent of instructor.
Clerkship in neurosurgery to be arranged at another institution with accredited residency program in neurosurgery under proper supervision.
NSU 470
Advanced Clinical Neurosurgery
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year medical student in good academic standing.
Student will function as acting intern on neurosurgery service. Admission and management of patients. Neurological history, examination, diagnostic procedures, and surgical management are emphasized. Students participate in meaningful aspects of surgical procedures and attend required conferences and rounds.
NSU 480
Insights in Neurosurgery
Consent of Instructor.  First- and second-year medical students in good academic standing.
Observation of neurosurgical care in emergency room, operating roomand hospital floors, including manner of treatment of a variety of chronic and acute neurological diseases.
NSU 499
Neurosurgery Research
Medical student with consent of instructor.
Student may participate in ongoing neurosurgical projects or may pursue and design independent projects.
NUB 210A
Advanced Nutrition I: Nutrition & Metabolism, Macronutrients
Admission to the Nutritional Biology Graduate Group or consent of instructor.Limited to 30 students.
Advanced general nutritional concepts. Integrating nutrition with biological systems, population nutrition issues, and research approaches. Advanced concepts on lipid and protein metabolism.
NUB 210B
Advanced Nutrition II: Nutrition & Cell Biology, Micronutrients
Admission to the Nutritional Biology Graduate Group or consent of instructor.Limited to 30 students.
Effects of nutrients at the cellular level. Principles of cell signaling and signaling modulation by nutrients. Advanced concepts of mineral and vitamin metabolism. Mineral and vitamin deviencies and associated pathologies.
NUB 290C
Research Group Conference
Graduate standing.
Weekly conference on research problems, progress and techniques in animal sciences. 
NUB 298
Directed Group Study
Graduate standing in Nutritional Biology Graduate Group or consent of instructor.

NUB 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.

NUT 099
Individual Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

NUT 104
Environmental & Nutritional Factors in Cellular Regulation & Nutritional Toxicants
BIS 101;  (BIS 103 or ABI 103).
Cellular regulation from nutritional/toxicological perspective. Emphasis: role of biofactors on modulation of signal transduction pathways, role of specific organelles in organization/regulation of metabolic transformations, major cofactor functions, principles of pharmacology/toxicology important to understanding nutrient/toxicant metabolism.
NUT 105
Nutrition & Aging
(NUT 111AV or NUT 111AY);  ABI 103;  Or the equivalent course to ABI 103.
Role of nutrition in the aging process from both an organismal/cell perspective, including demographics, theories of aging, nutrition and evolution, nutritional manipulation and life-span extension, and nutrition's impact on the diseases of aging. 
NUT 105
Nutrition through the Life Cycle
(BIS 103 or ABI 103);  NUT 111AY;  or Consent of Instructor.
Unique nutrient needs of people in different stages of the life cycle, including pregnant and lactating women, infants, children, adolescents, adults and the elderly. Physiological changes and conditions that influence nutrient needs, factors that influence food choices and appropriate dietary recommendations, and recent research are discussed.  
NUT 106
Food Chemistry for Clinical Nutrition
CHE 008B C- or better or CHE 118B C- or better or CHE 128B C- or better;  Concurrent with FST 100A recommended.Only open to Clinical Nutrition majors.
Chemical and physical principles that influence functional properties, nutrient content, safety, and sensory aspects of food. Emphasis on the application of these concepts in clinical nutrition.
NUT 111AY
Introduction to Nutrition & Metabolism
CHE 008B;  NPB 101;  Or the equivalent of NPB 101.Restricted to upper division or graduate level students only. 
Introduction to metabolism of protein, fat and carbohydrate: the biological role of vitamins and minerals; nutrient requirements during the life cycle; assessment of dietary intake and nutritional status. 
NUT 111B
Recommendations and Standards for Human Nutrition
CHE 008B;  NPB 101;  (NUT 111AV or NUT 111AY);  Or the equivalent of NPB 101.
Critical analysis of the development of nutritional recommendations for humans. Topics include: history of modern recommendations, development of the Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) and other food guides; the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRI); administrative structure of regulatory agencies pertinent to nutrition recommendations; introduction to scientific methods used to determine the recommendations; food labeling laws; nutrition recommendations in other countries and cultures.
NUT 111B
Recommendations & Standards for Human Nutrition
(CHE 008B or CHE 118B or CHE 128B);  NUT 111AY;  NPB 101 recommended.
Critical analysis of the development of nutritional recommendations for humans. Topics include: history of modern recommendations, development of the Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) and other food guides; the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRI); administrative structure of regulatory agencies pertinent to nutrition recommendations; introduction to scientific methods used to determine the recommendations; food labeling laws; nutrition recommendations in other countries and cultures.
NUT 112
Nutritional Assessment
((ABI 102,  ABI 103) or (BIS 102,  BIS 103));  NUT 111AY;  (STA 013 or STA 013Y or PLS 120).Restricted to upper division or graduate level Nutrition students only.
Methods of human nutritional assessment, including dietary, anthropometric, biochemical methods. Principles of precision, accuracy, and interpretation of results for individuals and populations.
NUT 113
Principles of Epidemiology in Nutrition
STA 013 or STA 013Y or PLS 120 or STA 100.
Introduction to epidemiology as it relates to the field of nutrition, including study design, principles of epidemiologic inference, criteria for causality, and interpreting measures of disease risk.
NUT 114
Developmental Nutrition
ABI 102;  ABI 103;  (NUT 111AV or NUT 111AY);  NUT 111B.
Role of nutritional factors in embryonic and postnatal development.
NUT 115
Animal Nutrition
CHE 008B or CHE 118B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Comparative differences among animals in digestion and metabolism of nutrients. Nutrient composition of feeds, digestive systems, digestion, absorption, feeding strategies.
NUT 116A
Clinical Nutrition
(NUT 111AV or NUT 111AY);  NUT 111B;  NUT 112;  NPB 101;  Or the equivalent to NPB 101.
Biochemical and physiological bases for therapeutic diets. Problems in planning diets for normal and pathological conditions.
NUT 116AL
Clinical Nutrition Practicum
NUT 116A (can be concurrent).
Fundamental principles of planning and evaluating therapeutic diets and patient education for pathological conditions covered in 116A.
NUT 116B
Clinical Nutrition
(NUT 111AV or NUT 111AY);  NUT 111B;  NUT 112;  NPB 101;  Or the equivalent to NPB 101.
Biochemical and physiological bases for therapeutic diets. Problems in planning diets for normal and pathological conditions.
NUT 116BL
Clinical Nutrition Practicum
NUT 116AL;  NUT 116B (can be concurrent).
Fundamental principles of planning and evaluating therapeutic diets and patient education for pathological conditions covered in NUT 116B. Continuation of NUT 116AL.
NUT 117
Experimental Nutrition
(NUT 111AV or NUT 111AY);  NUT 111B;  NUT 112;  BIS 102;  BIS 103;  MCB 120L or other laboratory course in biochemistry is recommended.
Methods of assessing nutritional status. Application of chemical, microbiological, chromatographic and enzymatic techniques to current problems in nutrition.
NUT 118
Community Nutrition
NUT 116A;  (NUT 111AV or NUT 111AY);  NUT 111B.
Nutrition problems in contemporary communities and of selected target groups in the United States and in developing countries. Nutrition programs and policy, principles of nutrition education.
NUT 119A
International, Community-Based Nutritional Assessment
NUT 112 (can be concurrent);  and Consent of Instructor.
Issues and problems related to community-based nutritional assessment in a low-income country, major nutritional problems in low-income countries; ethical issues in human investigation; survey design, data collection techniques, and data analysis; preparation for international travel; cross-cultural communication, health, and safety while living abroad.
NUT 119B
International, Community-Based Nutritional Assessment
NUT 119A;  and Consent of Instructor.Restricted to upper division students in Clinical Nutrition, Community Nutrition, Dietetics, and Nutrition Science.
A six-week summer course in Peru. Implementation of a community-based nutritional assessment survey, including development of the survey instrument, selection. Taught abroad.
NUT 120AN
Nutritional Anthropology
NUT 010 and ANT 002 recommended.
Nutritional anthropology from historical and contemporary perspectives; the anthropological approach to food and diet; field work methods; case histories that explore food patterns and their nutritional implications. 
NUT 122
Ruminant Nutrition & Digestive Physiology 
(ABI 103 or BIS 103);  BIS 002A;  BIS 002B;  BIS 002C;  (ANS 100 or NPB 101);  or Consent of Instructor.  MAT 016B recommended.
Study of nutrient utilization as influenced by the unique aspects of digestion and fermentation in ruminants, both domestic and wild. Laboratories include comparative anatomy, feed evaluation, digestion kinetics using fistulated cows, computer modeling, and microbial exercises.
NUT 123
Comparative Animal Nutrition
ABI 103 or BIS 103.Restricted to upper division and graduate level students.
Comparative nutrition of animals; including laboratory, companion, zoo, and wild, animals. Digestion and metabolic adaptations required for animal species to consume diverse diets. Relation of nutrition to metabolic adaptations and physiological states, including growth, reproduction, and diseases.
NUT 123L
Comparative Animal Nutrition Laboratory
ABI 103 or BIS 103.
Laboratory exercises leading to written reports on establishment of nutritional requirements and formulation of complete diets for laboratory, companion, zoo and wild animals. 
NUT 124
Nutrition & Feeding of Finfishes
BIS 103 or ABI 103.
Principles of nutrition and feeding of fishes under commercial situations; implication of fish nutrition to the environment and conservation of endangered species.
NUT 127
Environmental Stress & Development in Marine Organisms
ETX 101 or BIS 102 or BIS 104;  or equivalent course.  ETX 114A or NUT 114 recommended.
Taught at Bodega Marine Laboratory. Effects of environmental and nutritional stress, including pollutants, on development and function in embryos and larvae of marine organisms. Emphasis on advanced experimental methods.
NUT 129
Journalistic Practicum in Nutrition
(NUT 111AV or NUT 111AY);  NUT 111B;  or Consent of Instructor.  A course in written or oral expression.
Critical analysis and discussion of current, controversial issues in nutrition; use of journalistic techniques to interpret scientific findings for the lay public. Students required to write several articles for campus media. 
NUT 130
Experiments in Nutrition: Design & Execution
Consent of Instructor.  NUT 111AV, NUT 111AY, NUT 111B or NUT 114 recommended.
Experiments in current nutritional problems. Experimental design:students choose project and, independently or in groups of two-three, design a protocol, complete the project, and report findings.
NUT 141
Comparative Animal Nutrition & Metabolism
ABI 103;  (NUT 115 or NUT 116A or NUT 116B);  or Consent of Instructor.
Foundational principles of nutrition, nutrient composition of feed ingredients, digestive systems of domestic and exotic animals, nutrient digestibility and absorption, nutrient metabolism.
NUT 142
Companion Animal Nutrition
ABI 102;  NUT 115;  recommend ANS 042.
Applied companion animal nutrition, focused primarily on dogs and cats. Nutritional considerations specifically related to health and longevity of companion animals. Evaluation of commercial and prescription-type diets with an emphasis on functional ingredients. Impact of physiological status and disease on nutrient requirements of the animal and nutrient utilization in the body.
NUT 190
Proseminar in Nutrition
(NUT 111AV or NUT 111AY);  NUT 111B.Restricted to senior standing.
Discussion of human nutrition problems. Each term will involve a different emphasis among experimental, clinical, and dietetic problems of community, national and international scope.
NUT 190C
Nutrition Research Conference
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing in Nutrition or related biological science.
Introduction to research findings and methods in nutrition. Presentation and discussion of research by faculty and students.
NUT 192
Internship
Consent of Instructor.  One upper division course in nutrition.
Work experience on or off campus in practical application of nutrition, supervised by a faculty member.
NUT 197T
Tutoring in Nutrition
Consent of Instructor.  Nutrition Science, Clinical Nutrition or related major.
Tutoring of students in nutrition courses, assistance with discussion groups or laboratory sections, weekly conference with instructor in charge of course: written evaluations.
NUT 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

NUT 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

NUT 219A
International Nutrition
NUT 111AV;  NUT 111AY;  Graduate Standing; undergraduates only admitted with consent of instructor.
Epidemiology, etiology, and consequences of undernutrition, with particular focus on the nutritional problems of children and women in low income populations.
NUT 219B
International Nutrition
NUT 219A.
Intervention programs to prevent or ameliorate nutritional problems in low-income populations. Planning, implementing, and evaluating nutrition intervention programs.
NUT 230
Experiments in Nutrition: Design & Execution
Consent of Instructor.  NUT 201, NUT 202, NUT 203, NUT 204, or the equivalent recommended.
Student-selected projects to enhance laboratory skills. Independently, or in groups of two-three students, design a protocol, carry out the project, analyze the results and report the findings.
NUT 250
Metabolic Homeostasis
Passing the Nutrition Graduate Group Preliminary Examination or consent of instructor.Preference given to students in advanced standing in the Nutrition Graduate Group.
Regulatory mechanisms of carbohydrate, lipid, and protein homeostasis; mechanisms of metabolic enzyme regulation and of the metabolic hormones; homeostatic mechanisms and interactions; fuel-fuel interactions; nutrition-energy balance.
NUT 251
Nutrition & Immunity
PMI 126;  ABI 102;  MMI 107;  Or the equivalent to MMI 107.
Cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying interactions of nutrition and immune function, including modulation of immunocompetence by diet and effects of immune responses on nutritional needs. Lectures and discussion explore implications for resistance to infection, autoimmunity and cancer.
NUT 252
Nutrition & Development
NUB 210A, NUB 210B, and NUB 210C recommended.
Relationship of nutrition to prenatal and early postnatal development.
NUT 253
Control of Energy Balance & Body Weight
Consent of Instructor.
Comprehensive study of the biochemical, nutritional and physiological mechanisms controlling food intake, body composition and energy expenditure. Subject matter will be approached through lectures and discussions where students and staff will critically evaluate the literature.
NUT 254
Applications of Systems Analysis in Nutrition
NUT 202;  Or the equivalent.
Quantitative aspects of digestion and metabolism; principles of systems analysis. Evolution of models of energy metabolism as applied in currentfeeding systems. Critical evaluations of mechanistic models used analytically in support of nutritional research.
NUT 258
Field Research Methods in International Nutrition
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Issues and problems related to implementation of nutrition field research in less-developed countries, including ethics; relationships with local governments, communities, and scientists; data collection techniques and quality assurance; field logistics; research budgets; and other administrative and personal issues.
NUT 259
Nutrition & Aging
NUT 201;  NUT 202;  NUT 203;  NUT 204;  Three of the four courses.
Interaction between nutrition and aging. Topics include physiological/biochemical basis of aging, age-related changes affectingnutritional requirements, nutrition and mortality rate, assessment of nutritional status in the elderly, and relationship between developmental nutrition and the rate of aging.
NUT 290
Beginning Nutrition Seminar
First-year graduate standing.
Discussion and critical evaluation of topics in nutrition with emphasis on literature review and evaluation in this field. Students give oral presentations on relevant topics.
NUT 290C
Research Conference
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Major professors lead research discussions with their graduate students.Research papers are reviewed and project proposals presented and evaluated. Format will combine seminar and discussion style.
NUT 291
Advanced Nutrition Seminar
Second-year graduate standing.
Advanced topics in nutrition research. Multiple sections may be taken concurrently for credit.
NUT 293A
Current Topics in Obesity, Food Intake & Energy Balance
NUT 129;  Or graduate standing; undergraduates with upper division standing with at least one writing course may enroll with consent of instructor.
Current research and its evaluation. Principles of experimental design and scientific background for given article. Articles summarized for posting on Internet for use by healthcare professionals.
NUT 293B
Current Topics in Obesity, Food Intake, & Energy Balance with Special Topics
NUT 129;  Graduate standing.
Undergraduates with upper division standing with at least one writing course may enroll with consent of instructor. A continuation of NUT 293A, with additional special topics.
NUT 294A
Current Topics in Developmental Nutrition
NUT 114 or NUT 252;  or Consent of Instructor.Restricted to graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Effects of nutrition on embryology, morphogenesis, and developmental mechanisms.
NUT 297T
Supervised Teaching in Nutrition
Graduate standing in nutrition or consent of instructor.
Practical experience in teaching nutrition at the university level; curriculum design and evaluation; preparation and presentation of material. Assistance in laboratories, discussion sections, and evaluation of student work.
NUT 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

NUT 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.

NUT 492A
Professionalism: An Academic Perspective
Graduate standing.
For graduate students in their initial quarter of residence. Professionalism topics are presented and examples drawn from both the biological and social sciences.
NUT 492C
Grant Writing
Graduate standing in Nutrition or consent of instructor.
Preparation of grants for governmental agencies (particularly NIH and USDA) and private foundations. Students will write a research grant or fellowship application.
OBG 194
Shifa Clinic Student Volunteer
Consent of Instructor.  The applications will be available for students. Selection of students will be made by selection committee of medical students coordinators and the IOR.
Attend clinic every third Sunday performing duties of receptionist, intake, translation, monitor. Students attend a meeting immediately after end of clinic.  There is a mandatory Monday meeting with Clinic co-directors. Students are expected to participate on various committees.   
OBG 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

OBG 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

OBG 290
Current Topics in Research
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Selected topics in reproductive biology.
OBG 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

OBG 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

OBG 430
Obstetrics & Gynecology Clerkship
Approval by School of Medicine Committee on Student Progress.
Obstetrics, gynecologic and gynecological oncology experience in the delivery room, operating room, clinics and wards at UCDMC and affiliated sites. Rounds, conferences, interactive student presentations and seminars ongoing.
OBG 430F
SJVP OBGYN Clerkship at UCSF
Approval by School of Medicine Committee on Student Progress.
Obstetrics, gynecologic and gynecological oncology experience in the delivery room, operating room, clinics and wards at UCSF Fresno.  Rounds, conferences, interactive student presentations and seminars ongoing.
OBG 430R
Rural PRIME OBGYN Longitudinal Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.
Obstetrics and Gynecology Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
OBG 430RA
Rural PRIME OBGYN Longitudinal Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.
Obstetrics and Gynecology Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
OBG 430RB
Rural PRIME OBGYN Longitudinal Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.
Obstetrics and Gynecology Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
OBG 430RC
Rural PRIME OBGYN Longitudinal Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.
Obstetrics and Gynecology Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
OBG 430RD
Rural PRIME OBGYN Longitudinal Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.
Obstetrics and Gynecology Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
OBG 439D
Directed Clinical Studies in OBGYN
Consent of Instructor.
Individual directed studies in extended preparation for modified curriculum or to complete a clinical rotation following a leave of absence.
OBG 439R
Directed Studies in OBGYN
Consent of Instructor.
Individual directed studies in extended preparation for remediation of all or part of clinical rotation. Clinical studies to accommodate and satisfy remedial work as directed by the Committee on Student Progress and approved by the course IOR.
OBG 460
Away Clinical Elective in OBGYN
OBG 430;  and Consent of Instructor.  Or the equivalent; third- or fourth-year medical student.
Active participation in inpatient and/our outpatient care. Attendance at specified conferences; student-faculty member informal conferences. 
OBG 465
Away Acting Internship in OBGYN
OBG 430;  and Consent of Instructor.  Other third-year core clerkships.
Work at the level of a sub intern in Inpatient and/or Outpatient settings. Students are expected to provide direct patient management.
OBG 470
Gynecologic Oncology Acting Internship
OBG 430;  and Consent of Instructor.  The third-year core clerkships.
Four week elective primarily involves direct inpatient management of women on the UCDMC Gyn/Onc service. Students will be acting at the level of a sub-intern and will work under the supervision of house staff, fellows, and attendings.  
OBG 471
Ambulatory Gynecology & Obstetrics Elective
OBG 430;  and Consent of Instructor.  Third- or fourth-year Medical Student.
Conduct examinations, present patients and discuss treatment regimens at the following ambulatory clinics: General Obstetrics & Gynecology, New and Return Obstetrics (including Post-Partum), High-Risk Obstetrics, Pre-Operative Clinic, and other sub-specialty clinics as assigned.
OBG 472
Family Planning & Reproductive Health
OBG 430;  and Consent of Instructor.
Elective focuses on the Gynecologic Subspecialty of Family Planning. Counseling and provision of contraceptive methods, experience with pelvic ultrasounds, management of spontaneous, inevitable and induced abortion and post-abortion care by both surgical and medical techniques are included.
OBG 475
Labor & Delivery Acting Internship
OBG 430;  and Consent of Instructor.  The third-year core clerkships.
Four week elective primarily involves direct inpatient management of women on the UCDMC L&D unit. Students will be acting at the level of a sub-intern and will work under the supervision of house staff, fellows, and attendings.
OBG 493
Gender Specific Medicine SSM
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to UC Davis School of Medicine students only.
Special Studies Module, a four-week course on the topic: Basic Science Principles Relating to Gender Specific Medicine.
OBG 494
Shifa Clinic
Medical student in good standing.Restricted to Medical student only.
Interaction with patients from multiple ethnic and cultural backgrounds under the direct supervision of a physician/preceptor. Women's health issues and primary care issues in a diversely mixed population.
OBG 494A
Shifa Clinic
Consent of Instructor.  Medical student in good standing.
Interaction with patients from multiple ethnic and cultural backgrounds under the direct supervision of a physician/preceptor. Women's health issues and primary care issues in a diversely mixed population.
OBG 494B
Shifa Clinic
Consent of Instructor.  Medical student in good standing.
Interaction with patients from multiple ethnic and cultural backgrounds under the direct supervision of a physician/preceptor. Women's health issues and primary care issues in a diversely mixed population.
OBG 494C
Shifa Clinic
Consent of Instructor.  Medical student in good standing.
Interaction with patients from multiple ethnic and cultural backgrounds under the direct supervision of a physician/preceptor. Women's health issues and primary care issues in a diversely mixed population.
OBG 498
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Explore particular topics in-depth in Obstetrics and Gynecology. Extensive contact with and oversight by instructor.
OBG 499
Research in Obstetrics & Gynecology
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year medical student.
Research in Obstetrics and Gynecology arranged with instructor.
OPT 192
Research Internship
Upper division standing; approval of project prior to period of internship by preceptor.
Supervised work experience in ophthalmology research. Research staff in Ophthalmology have programs in cell biology, electron microscopy, biochemistry, immunology and visual psychophysics.
OPT 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

OPT 299
Basic Research in Visual Science
Consent of Instructor.

OPT 442
Introduction to Ophthalmology 
Third- or fourth-year Medical Student with consent of instructor; consent of advisor; completion of third-year clerkships in Medicine and Surgery; consult Course Coordinator.
Ocular disease diagnosis and management relevant to the clinical practice of future primary care physicians and others.
OPT 465
Advanced Subspecialty Ophthalmology
IMD 430;  and Consent of Instructor.  Medical students in third or fourth year.
Participation in disciplines of neuro-ophthalmology/pediatric ophthalmology, diseases of the cornea and external eye, glaucoma and retina. 
OPT 498
Group Study
Medical students with consent of instructor.
Directed reading and discussion.
OPT 499
Research in Ophthalmology
Medical students with consent of instructor.
Individual research on selected topics in optics and visual physiology, cornea and external disease.
OSU 099
Special Studies for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.

OSU 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.

OSU 421
The Musculoskeletal System
Consent of committee on student progress.Restricted to Medical students only.
Basic and clinical science of orthopaedic surgery and rheumatology.
OSU 428
Ambulatory & Emergency Room Orthopaedics
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year medical student in good academic standing.Limited enrollment.
Introduction to general orthopaedic problems and trauma and their management in an outpatient environment, including the emergency room. Conduct orthopaedic examinations, present patients to staff rotating through trauma, hand, pediatrics, adult and foot clinics.
OSU 462
Community Preceptorship
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year medical student in good academic standing; consent of instructor.
Acquaints student with private practice of orthopaedics in the community setting. Opportunity to observe and assist private practitioners in office, emergency room, operating room and inpatient environment. Student must provide own transportation.
OSU 464
Acting Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year medical student in good academic standing.
Rotation designed to increase basic knowledge of musculoskeletal abnormalities at clinical level. Attention focused on selective case material. For those students who demonstrate proficiency, responsibility will be similar to that of intern. 
OSU 465
Externship in Advanced Orthopaedics
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year medical student in good academic standing.
Advanced Orthopaedic rotation done at an approved institution. Topics may include Trauma, Sports, Spine, Pediatrics, Joint and/or Foot/Ankle.  Students are expected to perform at the level of an Intern.
OSU 480
Insights in Orthopardic Surgery
Consent of Instructor.  First- and second-year medical students in good academic standing.
Exposure to aims, methods and procedures in orthopaedic surgery via attendance at grand rounds, patient care conferences, and group discussions.
OSU 481
History of Medicine for Medical Students
Third- or fourth-year students in the School of Medicine or second-year students with consent of instructor.
Overview of the history of medicine throughout the world to introduce medical students to landmark accomplishments and key figures in thedevelopment of health care and to provide an expanded philosophical perspective on the everchanging field of modern medicine.
OSU 499
Orthopardics Research
Consent of Instructor.  Third- or fourth-year medical student in good academic standing.
Laboratory or clinical investigation on selected topics. 
OTO 192
Internship in Otolaryngology
Upper division standing; approval of project prior to period of internship by preceptor.
Supervised work experience in otolaryngology and related fields. Final project report.
OTO 199
Special Study in Otolaryngology for Advanced Undergraduates
Advanced undergraduate with consent of instructor.

OTO 290C
Research Conference in Otolaryngology
Graduate students; medical students; advanced undergraduates with consent of instructor.
Presentation and discussion of faculty and student research in otolaryngology.
OTO 291
Principles of Speech, Hearing & Equilibrium
Graduate students; medical students; advanced undergraduates with consent of instructor.
Presentations by faculty and guest lecturers on anatomy, physiology, and behaviors involved in speech production, hearing, and equilibrium. Each student expected to make one class presentation.
OTO 299
Individual Study in Otolaryngology for Advanced Graduate Students
Advanced graduate student with consent of instructor.

OTO 403
Basic Principles of Reconstructive Surgery
Third- or fourth-year medical student with consent of instructor.
Formal presentations covering basic principles of reconstructive surgery, including wound healing, treatment of lacerations, skin and bone grafts, flaps, Z-plasties and revision of scars. Laboratory session utilizing animal tissues.
OTO 440
Otolaryngology Required Clerkship
Consent by Committee on Student Evaluation and Promotion.
Provide fundamental knowledge of otorhinolaryngologic diagnosis and principles, develop facility with basic ENT instruments, provide an understanding of treatment for ear, nose and throat problems and provide knowledge of what patients should be referred for otorhinolaryngologic care.
OTO 450
Fourth Year Otolaryngology Elective
Consent of Instructor.  Third- or fourth-year Medical Students.
Participation in Otolaryngology Clinic and operating room. Evaluation and management of common Otolaryngologic diseases.
OTO 460
Clinical Otolaryngology Elective
Third- and fourth-year medical students with consent of instructor; open to graduate students.
Approved for graduate degree credit. Total involvement in clinical activities of the department.
OTO 490
Journal Seminar
Fourth-year medical students with consent of instructor; open to graduate students.
Approved for graduate degree credit. Monthly review of current otolaryngologic and related literature and recent advances.
OTO 498
Individual or Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Introduction to basic research in Otolaryngology. Lectures, discussionand laboratory study of sensory and motor systems.
OTO 499
Research
Medical students with consent of instructor; Open to graduate students.
Approved for graduate degree credit. Participation in ongoing projects.
PAS 299
Research & Writing
Consent of Instructor.Open to Graduate Students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs, or by consent of instructor. 
Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership graduate program students conduct research and writing under the supervision of a faculty member.
PAS 400
Basic Clinical Skills
Consent of Instructor.Open to Graduate Students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs, or by consent of instructor. 
Instruction and practice of the fundamental clinical skills necessary for patient care comprise this course with a primary focus on principles of effective communication in establishing the therapeutic provider-patient relationship. 
PAS 401
Basic Clinical Skills
Consent of Instructor.Open to Graduate Students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs, or by consent of instructor. 
Continuation of focus on history taking and physical examination skills with advanced/specialized content. 
PAS 410B
Advanced Clinical Skills
Consent of Instructor.Open to Graduate Students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs, or by consent of instructor. 
Continuation of focus on history taking and physical examination skills with advanced/specialized content related specialty systems.
PAS 410D
Advanced Clinical Skills
Consent of Instructor.Open to Graduate Students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs, or by consent of instructor. 
Continuation of focus on history taking and physical examination skills with advanced/specialized content related to specified systems. 
PAS 410E
Advanced Clinical Skills
Consent of Instructor.Open to Graduate Students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs, or by consent of instructor. 
Continuation of focus on history taking and physical examination skills with advanced/specialized content related to specified systems. 
PAS 410F
Advanced Clinical Skills
Consent of Instructor.Open to Graduate Students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs, or by consent of instructor. 
Continuation of focus on history taking and physical examination skills with advanced/specialized content related to specified systems. 
PAS 410G
Advanced Clinical Skills
Consent of Instructor.Open to Graduate Students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs. 
Continuation of focus on history taking and physical examination skills with advanced/specialized content related to specified  systems. 
PAS 440
Preparation for Clinical Practice
Consent of Instructor.Open to Graduate Students in the Nursing Science and Health-Care Leadership Graduate Degree programs, or by consent of instructor. 
Students are placed in clinical settings and/or clinical simulation laboratories to observe and practice the integration of clinical skills with direct supervision by faculty. 
PBG 200A
Principles of Population Biology 
PBG 231 (can be concurrent);  and Consent of Instructor.  PBG 231 required concurrently.
Principles of single-species ecology and evolution. Topics include ecology of individuals, population growth models, structured populations, life history strategies, stochastic populations, basic population genetics theory, deleterious alleles in natural populations,and molecular population genetics.
PBG 200B
Principles of Population Biology 
PBG 200A;  PBG 231.
Principles of multi-species communities. Topics include competition, mutualism, metapopulations, food webs and trophic cascades, interactions between simple ecological communities, island biogeography, succession, and large-scale patterns.
PBG 200C
Principles of Population Biology 
PBG 200B.
Principles of microevolution and macroevolution. Topics include evolutionary quantitative genetics, analysis of hybrid zones, speciation, the fossil record, biogeography, and phylogeny reconstruction.
PBG 203
Advanced Evolution
Graduate standing.
Adaptation and speciation, and biochemical and morphological evolution in plants and animals with emphasis on the appropriateness of different methods of analysis.
PBG 206
Ecology of Insect Parasitoids
Introductory animal ecology or behavior.
Insect parasitoids will be investigated as model systems to address current topics in behavioral, population, and evolutionary ecology. Theory will be synthesized and critical empirical tests of ecologicalhypotheses emphasized.
PBG 207
Plant Population Biology
Advanced undergraduate ecology course (e.g., ESP 100, EVE 101, ENT 104, PLB 117), and advanced undergraduate course in genetics and/or evolution (e.g., BIS 101 or EVE 100).
Introduction to theoretical and empirical research in plant population biology. Emphasis placed on linking ecological and genetic approaches to plant population biology.
PBG 212
Topics in Invertebrate Evolution
Graduate standing or consent of instructor; courses in evolutionary biology, systematics, and ecology highly recommended.
Advanced seminar that critically examines problems relevant to evolutionary patterns among the invertebrates.
PBG 221
Animal Behavior, Ecology & Evolution
NPB 102;  EVE 100;  EVE 101;  and Consent of Instructor.  Or the equivalent, graduate standing.
Interface between animal behavior, ecology and evolution. New developments in behavioral ecology development and testing of hypotheses in this discipline.
PBG 224
Field Reconnaissance for Population Biologists
Graduate student in Population Biology, or consent of instructor.
Biweekly field trips to acquaint students with plant and animal communities, biodiversity, and ecological and evolutionary research opportunities in northern and central California.
PBG 225
Terrestrial Field Ecology
Introductory ecology and introductory statistics, or consent of instructor.
Field course conducted over spring break and four weekends at Bodega Bay, emphasizing student projects. Ecological hypothesis testing, data gathering, analysis, and written and oral presentation of results are stressed.
PBG 231
Mathematical Methods in Population Biology
MAT 016C or MAT 021C;  Or the equivalent.
Mathematical methods used in population biology. Linear and nonlinear difference equation and differential equation models are studied, using stability analysis and qualitative methods. Partial differential equation models are introduced. Applications to population biology models are stressed.
PBG 233
Computational Methods in Population Biology
A course in theoretical ecology (e.g., ECL 231 or an equivalent to ESP 121 from your undergraduate institution) or consent of instructor; no programming experience required.
Numerical methods for simulating population dynamics using the computational software package R. Emphasis  placed on model formulation and development, theoretical concepts and philosophical principles to guide simulation efforts, model parameterization, and implementing simulations with R.
PBG 250A
Interdisciplinary  Approaches to Biological Invasions
Graduate standing.
An integrative consideration of biological invasions, including an overview of concepts from ecology, ecological theory, evolution, genetics, philosophy, and other areas. Emphasis on potential contributions of each area for interdisciplinary problem-solving. 
PBG 250B
Interdisciplinary Approaches to Biological Invasions
Graduate standing.
An integrative consideration of biological invasions, including an overview of concepts from history, sociology, communications, law, policy, management, and other areas. Emphasis on potential contributions of each area for interdisciplinary problem-solving. 
PBG 251
Collaborative Project in Biological Invasions
PBG 250A;  PBG 250B;  and Consent of Instructor.  Or equivalent courses.
A year-long interdisciplinary collaborative project focusing on biological invasions, resulting in a paper or other suitable product presented at a symposium at the conclusion of the project.
PBG 270
Research Conference in Evolutionary Biology
Consent of Instructor.
Critical presentation and evaluation of current literature and ongoing research in evolutionary biology. 
PBG 271
Research Conference in Ecology
Consent of Instructor.
Critical presentation and evaluation of current literature and ongoing research in ecology. Requirements include active participation in weekly discussions and the presentation of a paper or chapter once per quarter.
PBG 287
Advanced Animal Behavior
NPB 102;  EVE 100;  or the equivalents; graduate standing; Consent of Instructor.
Reading, reports and discussion on current topics in animal behavior, with a focus on topics that lie at the interface between animal behavior, ecology and evolution.  
PBG 290
Seminar
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Seminars presented by visiting lecturers, UC Davis graduate students and faculty. 
PBG 290C
Research Conference in Population Biology 
PBG 299 (can be concurrent);  and Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing; PBG 299 required concurrently.
Presentation and discussion of faculty and graduate student research in population biology.
PBG 292
Topics in Ecology & Evolution
Graduate standing.
Seminar presented by visiting lecturers, UC Davis faculty and graduate students. 
PBG 296
Seminar in Geographical Ecology 
EVE 100 or EVE 101;  or Consent of Instructor.
Recent developments in theoretical and experimental biogeography, historical biogeography and related themes in systematics, the biology of colonizing species, and related topics. 
PBG 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

PBG 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

PBI 200A
PBGG Core Course Series - Fall quarter
Graduate standing; a broad background of undergraduate level coursework in Plant Biology is recommended.
The first of three PBGG graduate core courses. Coverage includes (1) plant genes,  (2) biotechnology, (3) genomes and gene flow, (4) principles of plant systematics, and (5) the evolution of flowering plants. 
PBI 200B
PBGG Core Course Series - Winter quarter
PBI 200A.
The second of three PBGG graduate core courses. Coverage includes (1) embryo development, (2) cytoskeleton and vesicle trafficking, (3) cell walls, (4) cell growth, (5) secondary metabolism, (6) plastids and (7) senescence.
PBI 200C
PBGG Core Course Series - Spring quarter
PBI 200A;  PBI 200B.
The third of three PBGG graduate core courses. Coverage includes (1) plant water relations,  (2) cellular & long distance transport processes, (3) mineral nutrition, (4) environmental impacts on growth & development, (5) stress perception & responses, (6) canopy processes, and (7) plant interactions with other organisms.
PBI 203N
Biology of the Plant Cell
PLB 111 or BIS 104;  Or the equivalent.Open to senior undergraduate students in Plant Biology major. 
Recent progresses in plant cell biology. Intracellular motility in plant cells. Common techniques associated with the progress of plant cell biology.  
PBI 210
Plant Ecophysiology
PLB 111;  PLB 112;  PLB 117.
Study of the mechanisms of physiological adaptation of plants to their environment.
PBI 212
Physiology of Herbicidal Action 
PLB 112.
Study of the fundamental processes involved in the physiological action of herbicides. Detailed consideration of the fate of herbicides in plants.
PBI 214
Higher Plant Cell Walls
PLB 112;  A course in Biochemistry.
Lectures focus on the structure, analysis, synthesis, and development-related metabolism of cell walls. Discussions center on analysis of scientific papers related to lecture topics.
PBI 220
Plant Developmental Biology
Plant Anatomy, Physiology, and Biochemistry.
A survey of the concepts of plant development and organization. Examines plant cells, tissues, and organs with special emphasis on experimentalevidence for mechanisms regulating developmental processes.
PBI 227
Plant Molecular Biology 
MCB 121 or MCB 161.
Molecular aspects of higher plant biology with emphasis on gene expression. Plant nuclear and organelle genome organization, gene structure, mechanisms of gene regulation, gene transfer, and special topics related to development and response to biological and environmental stimuli.
PBI 290C
Research Conference in Botany
Graduate standing and/or consent of instructor.
Presentation and discussion by faculty and graduate students of research projects in botany.
PBI 291
Graduate Student Seminar in Plant Biology
Graduate student standing.
Student-given seminars on topics in plant biology, with critiques by instructor and peers. How to give a seminar, including preparation of visual and other teaching aids. Topic determined by instructor in charge.
PBI 292
Seminars in Plants Biology
Consent of Instructor.
Review of current literature in botanical disciplines. Disciplines and special subjects to be announced quarterly. Present and analyze assigned topics.
PBI 293
Seminar in Postharvest Biology
Consent of Instructor.  Open to advanced undergraduates.
Intensive study of selected topics in the postharvest biology of fruits, vegetables, and ornamentals.
PBI 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

PBI 390
The Teaching of Plant Biology
Graduate standing; concurrent appointment as a teaching assistant in Plant Biology.
Consideration of the problems of teaching botany, especially of preparing for and conducting discussions, guiding student laboratory work, and the formulation of questions and topics for examinations.
PED 199
Special Study in Pediatric Research
Undergraduate student with consent of instructor based upon adequate preparation as determined by instructor.

PED 299
Pediatric Research
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate students who are candidates for a degree in some area of biology or behavioral sciences.

PED 401
Preceptorship in Pediatrics
Second-year medical student or first-year medical student with consent of instructor.
Opportunity to observe and participate in primary medical care in a practicing pediatricians office. Participation in history-taking and physical examination will be at discretion of preceptor and dependent on students experience. Evaluation by student.
PED 402
Clinical Experience in Private Practice
PED 430;  Third-or fourth-year medical student; consent of preceptor and Chairperson.
Opportunity to participate in practice of preceptor, performing such tasks as history taking, physical examination, and patient management.
PED 405
Pediatrics Lecture Series
Consent of Instructor.
Lecture series covers major topics in pediatrics with case presentations and panels from pediatric subspecialists. Topics include, but are not limited to: cardiology, pulmonology, nephrology, gastroenterology, critical care, and primary care pediatrics. 
PED 415
Fetal & Neonatal Physiology
Consent of Instructor.
Elective is designed to combine for study a variety of aspects of the physiology, anatomy and biochemistry of the fetus and newborn with relevant clinical examples of disorders in each of the 10 topics that will be discussed.
PED 430
Pediatric Clerkship
Approval by School of Medicine Committee on Student Progress.Restricted to Medical students only.
Eight week clinical clerkship providing students with the opportunity to learn fundamentals of caring for the pediatric patient by participating in nursery, ambulatory and inpatient services at UCDMC and affiliated clinical sites.  Rounds, conferences, student presentations ongoing.
PED 430F
SJVP Pediatric Clerkship at UCSF
Approval by School of Medicine Committee on Student Progress.Restricted to Medical students only. 
Eight-week clinical clerkship providing students with the opportunity to learn fundamentals of caring for the pediatric patient by participating in nursery, ambulatory and inpatient services at UCSF Fresno. Rounds, conferences, student presentations ongoing.
PED 430FA
SJVP Longitudinal Pediatrics Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.
Longitudinal Pediatrics Clerkship runs concurrently with Internal Medicine, Family Medicine and Psychiatry for 32 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty.
PED 430FB
SJVP Longitudinal Pediatrics Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.
Longitudinal Pediatrics Clerkship runs concurrently with Internal Medicine, Family Medicine and Psychiatry for 32 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty.
PED 430FC
SJVP Longitudinal Pediatrics Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.
Longitudinal Pediatrics Clerkship runs concurrently with Internal Medicine, Family Medicine and Psychiatry for 32 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty.
PED 430FD
SJVP Longitudinal Pediatrics Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.
Longitudinal Pediatrics Clerkship runs concurrently with Internal Medicine, Family Medicine and Psychiatry for 32 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty.
PED 430R
Rural PRIME Pediatrics Longitudinal Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.
Pediatrics Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
PED 430RA
Rural PRIME Pediatrics Longitudinal Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.
Pediatrics Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
PED 430RB
Rural PRIME Pediatrics Longitudinal Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.
Pediatrics Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
PED 430RC
Rural PRIME Pediatrics Longitudinal Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.
Pediatrics Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
PED 430RD
Rural PRIME Pediatrics Longitudinal Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.
Pediatrics Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
PED 430TA
TeachMS Longitudinal Pediatrics Clerkship (A)
Consent of Instructor.
Longitudinal Clerkship runs concurrently with Primary Care and Psychiatry for 24 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. On-going patient write-ups, rounds, conferences are required.
PED 430TB
TeachMS Longitudinal Pediatrics Clerkship (B)
Consent of Instructor.
Longitudinal clerkship runs concurrently with Primary Care and Psychiatry for 24 weeks.  Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty.  On-going patient write-ups, rounds, conferences are required.
PED 430TC
TeachMS Longitudinal Pediatrics Clerkship (C)
Consent of Instructor.
Longitudinal clerkship runs concurrently with Primary Care and Psychiatry for 24 weeks.  Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty.  On-going patient write-ups, rounds, conferences are required.
PED 439D
Directed Clinical Studies in Pediatrics
Consent of Instructor.
Individual directed studies in extended preparation for modified curriculum or to complete a clinical rotation following a leave of absence.
PED 439R
Directed Studies in Pediatrics
Consent of Instructor.
Individual directed studies in extended preparation for remediation of all or part of clinical rotation. Clinical studies to accommodate and satisfy remedial work as directed by the Committee on Student Progress and approved by the course IOR.
PED 460A
Acting Internship: General Inpatient Pediatric Clerkship
PED 430 B or better;  and Consent of Instructor.  Letter of recommendation from Pediatrics faculty member.Limited enrollment.
The Ward Acting Intern functions in a manner similar to that of a pediatric intern. The Acting Intern takes admissions in the regular sequence and is expected to take night call. 
PED 460B
Acting Internship: Outpatient Pediatrics
PED 430 B or better;  and Consent of Instructor.  Letter of recommendation from Pediatrics faculty member.Limited enrollment.
Supervised experience in pediatric care on outpatient service at UCDMC. Student functions as Acting Intern with appropriate supervision by residents and attending faculty.
PED 461
Pediatric Inpatient AI in Hematology/Oncology
PED 430;  and Consent of Instructor.  Satisfactory completed.Limited Enrollment.
Inpatient and outpatient experience in diagnosis and management of oncologic and hematologic disorders in children. Laboratory experience and participation in clinical investigation may be arranged.
PED 462
Elective in Pediatric Endocrinology
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of second-year study or the equivalent.Limited enrollment.
Inpatient and outpatient experience in diagnosis and management of endocrine endocrine disorders in children. Laboratory experience and participation in clinical investigation may be arranged. 
PED 464
Acting Internship in Neonatology
PED 430 B or better;  and Consent of Instructor.  Letter of recommendation from Pediatrics faculty member.Limited enrollment.
Diagnostic and therapeutic aspect of the medical and surgical high-risk neonate. Student expected to take night call.
PED 465
Pediatrics Specialty Clinic Elective
PED 430;  and Consent of Instructor.  Satisfactory completed.Limited enrollment.
Supervised experience in a variety of pediatric subspecialty clinics. Limited enrollment.
PED 465
Away Advanced Clinical Clerkship in Pediatrics
PED 430;  and Consent of Instructor.  PED 430 satisfactorily completed.Limited enrollment.
Supervised experience in a variety of pediatric subspecialty clinics.
PED 466
Elective in Pediatric Cardiology
PED 430;  Satisfactory completed.
Inpatient and outpatient experience in diagnosis and management of cardiologic disorders in children. Laboratory experience and participation in clinical investigation may be arranged.
PED 467
Elective in Pulmonary Medicine
Pediatric clerkship.
Inpatient and outpatient management of pediatric patients with pulmonary diseases. These will include but will not be limited to cystic fibrosis, asthma, and other forms of chronic pulmonary diseases as well as congenital abnormalities.
PED 468
Elective in Pediatrics Nephrology
PED 430;  and Consent of Instructor.  Satisfactory completed.Limited enrollment.
Inpatient and outpatient experience in diagnosis and management of renal disorders in children. Laboratory experience and participation in clinical investigation may be arranged.
PED 469
Elective in Pediatric Infectious Disease 
PED 430;  and Consent of Instructor.  Satisfactory completed.Limited enrollment.
Inpatient and outpatient experience in diagnosis and treatment of infectious disease of infants and children. Laboratory and clinical investigation may be arranged.
PED 470
Elective in Pediatric Neurology
PED 430;  IMD 430;  OBG 430;  and Consent of Instructor.  All courses satisfactory completed.Limited enrollment.
Inpatient and outpatient experience in diagnosis and management of neurological disorders in children. Students will also participate in other pediatric subspecialty clinics which serve children with neurological disorders. Does not satisfy the fourth-year neurology requirement.
PED 471
Elective in Pediatric Gastroenterology
PED 430;  and Consent of Instructor.  Satisfactory completed.Limited enrollment.
Inpatient and outpatient experience in diagnosis and management of gastroenterology disorders in children. Laboratory experience and participation in clinical investigation may be arranged.
PED 472
Clinical Rotation in Adolescent Medicine
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year Medical Student.
Under supervision, students will see patients in the UC Davis clinic and at a number of community-based sites. Emphasis on the socially-mediated problems that face adolescents, including substance abuse, STD's, pregnancy, depression and suicide. One hour of lecture each week.
PED 473
Away Acting Internship in Pediatrics
Consent of Instructor.  Satisfactory completion of Pediatrics Clerkship.
Work at the level of a sub intern in Inpatient and/or Outpatient settings. Expectation is to provide direct patient management.
PED 476
Acting Internship in Pediatric Intensive Care
PED 430 A is required;  or Consent of Instructor.  Letter of recommendation from Pediatrics faculty member.Limited enrollment.
Evaluation and support of critically ill infants and children. In general, student expected to take night call every third night during rotation. 
PED 493
Ethical, Legal & Social Issues in Clinical Genetics
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to UC Davis School of Medicine students only.
Develop advanced knowledge, communication skills and attitudes necessary to provide compassionate, knowledgeable, and expert care to patients who may be at increased genetic risk for disease. Seminars cover ethical and legal principles, epidemiology, and genetics.  
PED 493B
Living with Intellectual & Developmental Disability in the Community 
Consent of Instructor.
In-depth experience with Intellectual & Developmental Disability across the lifespan. 
PED 493C
Fetal & Neonatal Physiology SSM
Consent of Instructor.
Elective is available for students interested in exploring the fascinating world of the fetus and neonate. Designed to combine the basic sciences with relevant clinical examples of disorders.
PED 499
Research Topics in Pediatrics
Student in Medical School with consent of instructor.
Individual research project in pediatric subspecialty areas (cardiology, endocrinology, hematology, metabolism, newborn physiology and others) may be arranged with faculty member. Independent research by student will be emphasized and long-term projects are possible.
PER 002
Elementary Persian
PER 001;  or Consent of Instructor.
Continuation of PER 001. Introduction to listening, speaking, reading and writing skills in Persian and to Persian culture.
PER 003
Elementary Persian
PER 002;  or Consent of Instructor.
Continuation of PER 002. Introduction to listening, speaking, reading and writing skills in Persian and to Persian culture.
PER 021
Intermediate Persian
PER 003;  or the equivalent.
Integrated presentation of listening, speaking, reading and writing skills as well as cultural topics in intermediate Persian. 
PER 022
Intermediate Persian
PER 021;  or the equivalent.
Integrated presentation of listening, speaking, reading and writing as well as cultural topics in Intermediate Persian.
PER 023
Intermediate Persian
PER 022;  or equivalent knowledge of Persian.
Integrated presentation of listening, speaking, reading and writing skills as well as cultural topics in Intermediate Persian.
PER 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study. 
PER 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.
Special study.
PER 101
Advanced Persian: Topics in Modern Persian Culture 1900-Present
PER 023;  or Consent of Instructor.
Integrated work on reading, listening, discussion and writing about modern Persian cultural production using fiction and poetry as well as cinema and theory.
PER 103
Advanced Persian: Topics in Medieval Persian Culture 900-1500
PER 023;  or Consent of Instructor.
Integrated work on reading, listening, discussion, writing about medieval Persian culture with a focus on lyric and narrative poetry and representative selections of literary prose, rhetoric, biography, history, religious and philosophical discourse.
PER 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to graduate students. 
Teaching practicum. 
PFS 270A
Individually Guided Research in Performance Studies
PFS 200;  (PFS 265A or PFS 265B or PFS 265C or PFS 265D);  and Consent of Instructor.Restricted to students in the Graduate Group Ph.D. in Performance Studies.
Individually guided research, under the supervision of a faculty member, on a Performance Studies topic related to the student's proposed dissertation project to produce a dissertation prospectus.
PFS 270B
Individually Guided Research in Performance Studies
PFS 200;  (PFS 265A or PFS 265B or PFS 265C or PFS 265D);  and Consent of Instructor.Restricted to students in the Graduate Group Ph.D. in Performance Studies.
Individually guided research, under the supervision of a faculty member, on a Performance Studies topic related to the student's proposed dissertation project, to produce a dissertation prospectus.
PFS 270C
Individually Guided Research in Performance Studies
PFS 200;  (PFS 265A or PFS 265B or PFS 265C or PFS 265D);  and Consent of Instructor.Restricted to students in the Graduate Group Ph.D. in Performance Studies.
Individually guided research, under the supervision of a faculty member, on a Performance Studies topic related to the student's proposed dissertation project to produce a dissertation prospectus. 
PFS 290
Colloquia in Performance Studies
Registration in Performance Studies Graduate Group and prior to Qualifying Examination.
Designed to provide cohort identity and faculty exchange. Opportunity to present papers, hear guest   lecturers, and see faculty presentations, gather for organizational and administrative new, exchange of information and make announcements. Must be taken every year that a Performance Studies graduate is registered, prior to taking the Qualifying Examination.
PFS 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

PFS 299
Individual Study
Consent of Instructor.

PFS 299D
Dissertation Research
Consent of Instructor.  Advancement to Candidacy.

PFS 459
Approaches to Theatre & Dance
Consent of Instructor.  Advanced graduate students.
Work on approaches to theatre, dance, film/video, design and performance, with a focus on methodology and professional development.
PHA 092
Internship in Pharmacology
Lower division student with good academic standing; approval of project prior to period of internship.
Supervised work experience in pharmacology and related fields.
PHA 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.

PHA 192
Internship in Pharmacology 
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing; approval of project prior to period of internship.
Supervised work experience in pharmacology and related fields.
PHA 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

PHA 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

PHA 207
Drug Discovery & Development
An equivalent course in general pharmacology, or knowledge of basic pharmacology.Intended for graduate students in Pharmacology and Toxicology, Chemistry and Clinical Research Graduate Groups; other students, including undergraduates, may be accepted with consent of instructors. 
Survey of the process by which a drug is discovered, developed and made available to the public. Topics include drug identification and optimization, safety testing, clinical evaluation, regulatory issues, intellectual property, formulation, and the global pharmaceutical industry.
PHA 208
Advanced Cardiac Physiology & Pharmacology
An equivalent course in general pharmacology or physiology (example, BIM 204), or knowledge of basic pharmacology/physiology.Open to graduate students from the Pharmacology and Toxicology, Molecular, Cellular and Integrated Physiology, Biomedical Engineering and Clinical Research Graduate Groups; other students (including undergraduates) may be accepted upon consultation with the instructors. 
Detailed characterization of the mechanisms involved in cardiac excitationcontraction coupling, alterations that occur in heart disease and pharmacological interventions. Topics include cardiac contractile apparatus, action potential, Ca cycling, excitationtranscription coupling, cardiac inotropy, heart failure and arrhythmias.
PHA 250
Functional Genomics: From Bench to Bedside
GGG 201C;  MCB 214;  Or equivalent.
Functional genomics (how genetic variation and epigenomics affect gene expression), with an emphasis on clinical relevance and applications. Topics include genetic variation and human disease, cancer therapeutics, and biomarker discovery.
PHA 291
Pharmacology Research Seminar Series
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division or graduate standing.
Research seminars on current topics in Pharmacology.
PHA 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

PHA 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.

PHA 400A
Pharmacology
Approval by School of Medicine Committee on Student Progress.Restricted to Medical student only.
Principles in pharmacology, including pharmacokinetics, drug metabolism and the actions, uses and toxicities of the major classes of drugs.
PHA 400B
Pharmacology
Approval by School of Medicine Committee on Student Progress; medical students only.
Principles in pharmacology, including autonomic pharmacology, general anesthetics, neuropharmacology and sedative/hypnotics.
PHA 400C
Pharmacology
PHA 400A;  PHA 400B;  Approval by School of Medicine Committee on Student Progress; medical students only.
Treatment of respiratory and cardiovascular disease, central nervous system drugs, GI, Toxicology and chemotherapy. Specific topics include: asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, hypertension, congestive heart failure, and the treatment of arrhythmias. Pain Management, depression, psychosis, acid reflux, IBS and toxicology.
PHA 445
Introduction to Integrative Medicine
Medical student in good standing.
Basic principles of alternative medical systems (e.g., traditional Chinese, Ayurvedic, Tibetan), alternative practices (e.g., chiropractic, osteopathy, naturopathy, homeopathy, herbalism, guided imagery/meditation, massage therapy), and mind/body connection are presented as introduction to integrating alternative treatments into traditional medicinal practice.
PHA 490
Seminar in Pharmacology for Medical Students
Consent of Instructor.
Seminar in pharmacology for medical students.
PHA 497T
Tutoring in Pharmacology
Advanced standing or consent of instructor.
Assist instructor by tutoring medical students in preparation for one of the departmental courses that is a component of the required curriculum of the School of Medicine.
PHA 498
Special Study for Medical Students
Consent of Instructor.
Special study in pharmacology for medical students.
PHA 499
Directed Research for Medical Students
Consent of Instructor.
Directed research in pharmacology for medical students.
PHE 006
Preparation & Participation in ICA Competition
Consent of instructor (head  coach).Restricted to student-athlete ICA members.
Sport specific advanced comprehensive training, instruction, and practice for the highly skilled collegiate varsity athlete. Development and improvement of performance skills utilizing motor-learning, nutritional science, and motivational theory. Classes offered in all UC Davis intercollegiate athletic sports.
PHE 008
Student-Athlete Life Skills
Consent of Instructor.Open to intercollegiate student-athletes only.
For intercollegiate student-athletes. Balancing academic and athletic demands. Academic, psychological, and sociocultural issues which influence success as a college student-athlete.
PHE 025
Theory of Lifesaving & Water Safety 
Sound physical condition, and no physical handicap that would render student unable to perform the required skills and ability to pass preliminary swimming test.
Provides the student with the knowledge, organizational procedures, and skill development necessary to provide for water safety and save his/her own life or the life of another in an aquatic emergency.
PHE 027
Training Course for Water Safety Instructors
PHE 001;  Advanced swimming (PHE 001) or consent of instructor; and current Advanced Life-Saving Certificate.
Theoretical knowledge and practical experience necessary for the organization and teaching of swimming and lifesaving classes. (AmericanRed Cross Water Safety Instructors Certificate awarded upon successful completion of necessary requirements.)
PHE 092
Physical Education Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Enrollment dependent on availability of intern positions, with priority given to Exercise Biology majors.
Work experience in the application of physical activity programs to teaching, recreational, clinical or research situations under department faculty supervision.
PHE 097T
Tutoring in Physical Education
Lower division standing and consent of Program Director.
Tutoring of students in lower division physical activity courses. Weekly meetings with instructor in charge of courses. Written reports on methods and materials required.
PHE 097TC
Tutoring in the Community
Lower division standing and consent of Program Director.
Tutoring in the community in physical activity related projects under the guidance of the Physical Education faculty. Regular meetings with instructor in charge and written report required.
PHE 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of instructor and Program Director.

PHE 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

PHE 100
Field Experience in Teaching Physical Education
PHE 001 or PHE 007;  Upper division standing.
Tutoring or teachers aide in physical education activities, including athletic coaching, in public schools under the guidance of a regular teacher with supervision by a departmental faculty person.
PHE 133
Prevention & Care of Sports Injuries
CHA 101 (can be concurrent).
Prevention, care, and rehabilitation of injuries incurred by athletes. Laboratory on anatomy, emergency care, physical therapy methods, and taping techniques.
PHE 135
Advanced Procedures in Evaluation & Management of Athletic Injuries
PHE 133 or EXB 133;  (CHA 101);  and Consent of Instructor.
Advanced study of the evaluation and management of athletic injuries, including mechanism of injury, biomechanics and pathophysiology. Current topics in athletic training.
PHE 141
Coaching Principles & Methods
PHE 143;  Upper division standing.
Technical, tactical, and strategic aspects of coaching. Methods for organizing and delivering effective information in coaching. Biomechanical basis of motor skills and motor learning principles applied to coaching. Classroom development of coaching skills and outside observations of coaching required.
PHE 143
Coaching Effectiveness
Upper division standing; 3 units of PHE 001 and PHE 006 combined.
Synthesis and application of basic components of sport psychology, sport pedagogy, and sport physiology and basic management and administration of athletics in public high schools.
PHE 144
Principles of Health Education
PHE 044;  Upper division standing or consent of instructor.
Principles of teaching health education in the public schools.
PHE 192
Physical Education Internship
Upper division standing and consent of instructor; enrollment dependent on availability of intern positions, with priority given to Exercise Science majors.
Work experience in the application of physical activity programs to teaching, recreational, clinical or research situations under department faculty supervision.
PHE 197T
Tutoring in Physical Education
Consent of chairperson.
Tutoring of students in lower division physical activity courses. Written reports on methods and materials required.
PHE 197TC
Tutoring in the Community
Upper division standing and consent of Department Chairperson.
Tutoring in the community in physical education related projects under the guidance of the Physical Education faculty. Regular meetings with instructor in charge and written report required.
PHE 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of instructor and Department Chairperson.

PHE 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

PHE 300
The Elementary Physical Education Program
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to senior standing or credential student.
Introduction to principles, theories, material, and practices of elementary school physical education program.
PHE 380
Methods of Teaching Physical Education
PHE 142;  or Consent of Instructor.  6 units of PHE 007.
The methods of teaching group and individual activities for grades K-12; program planning, class management, organization, and evaluation.
PHI 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

PHI 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

PHI 101
Metaphysics
One course in Philosophy recommended.
Theories of being. Such topics as reality, substance, universals, space, time, causality, becoming, body, experience, persons, freedom, and determinism. Views of the nature and method of metaphysics. Anti-metaphysical arguments.
PHI 102
Theory of Knowledge
One course in Philosophy recommended.
Analysis of the concept of knowledge. The relation between knowledge, belief and truth. Development of foundationalist, coherentist and externalist theories of justified belief. Examination of skepticism.
PHI 104
The Evolution of Mind
One previous course in Philosophy recommended.
Interpretation of human thought and behavior through the lens of evolutionary theory. Topics include the nature/nurture debate concerning cognitive and other mental capacities and traits, and the interaction between evolution, learning and development.
PHI 105
Philosophy of Religion
One course in Philosophy recommended.
Logical, metaphysical, epistemological, and existential aspects of selected religious concepts and problems.
PHI 107
Philosophy of the Physical Sciences
One Philosophy course or a science background recommended.
Nature of testability and confirmation of scientific hypotheses; nature of scientific laws, theories, explanations, and models. Problems of causality, determininism, induction, and probability; the structure of scientific revolutions.
PHI 108
Philosophy of the Biological Sciences
One course in Biology or one course in Philosophy recommended.
Scientific method in biology. Nature of biological theories, explanations, and models. Problems of evolutionary theory, ecology, genetics, and sociobiology. Science and human values.
PHI 109
Philosophy of the Social Sciences
One course in Philosophy or a social science recommended.
The nature of the social sciences, their subject matter and methods. Similarities to and differences from natural and life sciences. Predicting and explaining human behavior. Behaviorism. Reduction, holism, and individualism. Related moral issues. The social sciences and philosophy.
PHI 111
Philosophy of Space & Time
One upper division Philosophy course recommended.
Philosophical problems of space and time. Philosophical implications of space-time theories, such as those of Newton and Einstein. Topics may include the nature of geometry, conventionalism, absolutist versus relationist views of space and time, philosophical impact of relativity theory.
PHI 112
Intermediate Symbolic Logic
PHI 012 C- or better;  or Consent of Instructor.
Predicate logic syntax and semantics. Transcription between predicate logic and English. Models, truth-trees, and derivations. Identity, functions, and definite descriptions. Introduction to concepts of metatheory.
PHI 113
Metalogic
PHI 112;  MAT 108;  Or the equivalent.
The metalogic of classical propositional and first-order predicate logic.  Consistency, soundness and completeness of both propositional and predicate logic.  The Lwenheim-Skolem theorem for predicate logic. Undecidablity of predicate logic.
PHI 114
History of Ethics
One previous Philosophy course recommended.
Study of some classic texts from the history of philosophical writing on central problems of ethics, taking the form either of a survey or concentrated examination of selected historical figures. Readings from such philosophers as Aristotle, Butler, Hume, Kant, Mill.
PHI 115
Problems in Normative Ethics
One previous course in Philosophy recommended.
Moral philosophy studied through examination of moral problems and the moral principles and common sense intuitions that bear on them. Problems discussed may include: animal rights, fetal rights, euthanasia, justice and health care, war, nuclear deterrence, world hunger, environmental protection.
PHI 116
Ethical Theories
One course in ethics recommended.
Study of fundamental concepts and problems in ethical theory through an examination of classical and contemporary philosophical theories of ethics. Among the theories that may be discussed are utilitarianism, virtue theory, theories of natural rights, Kantian ethical theory, and contractarianism.
PHI 117
Foundations of Ethics
PHI 114, 115, 116, 101, or 137 recommended.
Advanced investigation of questions about the nature and foundations of morality. Among the topics that may be discussed are moral realism andanti-realism, cognitivism and non-cognitivism, types of relativism, moral skepticism, normative language and normative belief.
PHI 118
Political Philosophy
One course in Philosophy recommended.
Intensive examination of some central concepts of political thought such as the state, sovereignty, rights, obligation, freedom, law, authority, and responsibility.
PHI 119
Philosophy of Law 
Consent of Instructor.  One course in Philosophy recommended.
Philosophical theories of the nature of law, legal obligation, the relation of law and morals. Problems for law involving liberty and justice: freedom of expression, privacy, rights, discrimination and fairness, responsibility, and punishment.
PHI 120
Environmental Ethics 
One course in Philosophy recommended.
Conceptual and ethical issues concerning the environment. Extension of ethical theory to animals, all life, and ecosystem wholes. Topics may include contemporary environmental issues such as global warming, sustainability and biodiversity.
PHI 121
Bioethics
PHI 015 recommended.
In-depth coverage of topics in bioethics including resource allocation, measures of health and disease/disability, public health, and ethical issues related to research on human subjects and emerging technologies. 
PHI 123
Aesthetics
One course in Philosophy recommended.
Nature of art, of artistic creation, of the work of art, and of aesthetic experience; nature and validity of criticism; relations of art to its environment.
PHI 125
Theory of Action
One course in Philosophy recommended.
Survey of prominent contemporary approaches to leading problems in action theory. Problems include issues about the nature of intentional action and the conceptual character of explanations of actions in terms of the agent's reasons.
PHI 128
Rationality
One course in Philosophy recommended.
Philosophical issues concerning rationality in its various forms. Focus is on theoretical and practical reasoning and conditions for rational belief, choice, and action. Possible additional topics include rationality and human limitations; paradoxes of rationality; varieties of irrationality; rationality and objectivity.
PHI 129
Knowledge & the A Priori 
One course in Philosophy recommended.
Self-evidence, intuition, the (in)fallibility and (in)defeasibility of a priori methods. Analytic, formalist and Kantian accounts of how knowledge can be acquired through reasoning and intuition alone, without recourse to empirical methods.
PHI 131
Philosophy of Logic & Mathematics
PHI 012;  Or one course for credit in mathematics.
Nature of formal systems and mathematical theories. Selected topics include logical and semantical paradoxes; foundations of mathematics; set theory, type theory, and intuitionistic theory; philosophy of geometry; philosophical implications of Gdels incompleteness results.
PHI 133
Logic, Probability, & Artificial Intelligence
PHI 012;  PHI 112.
Introduction to theoretical artificial intelligence with a focus on nonmonotonic logic, Bayesian networks, and learning theory.
PHI 134
Modal Logic
PHI 112 or MAT 108;  Or the equivalent.
Survey of the main systems of modal logic, including Lewis systems S4 and S5. Possible worlds semantics and formal proofs. Applications to epistemology, ethics, or temporality.
PHI 135
Alternative Logics
PHI 012 or MAT 108;  Or the equivalent.
Alternatives to standard truth-functional logic, including many-valued logics, intuitionist logics, relevance logics, and non-monotonic logics.
PHI 136
Formal Epistemology
PHI 012.
Formal (mathematical) approaches to belief revision, knowledge and deduction, meta-knowledge, (multi-agent) epistemic logic, Bayesian confirmation, Bayes nets, epistemic and probabilistic paradoxes. 
PHI 137A
Philosophy of Language: Theory of Reference
One course in Philosophy or Linguistics recommended.
Survey of issues and views concerning reference, or how words refer to things.  Topics include names and descriptions, the distinction between sense and reference, the puzzle of non-referring terms, causal theories of reference, and possibility and necessity.
PHI 137B
Philosophy of Language: Truth & Meaning
One course in Philosophy or Linguistics recommended.
Comparative treatment of theories about the relationship between truth and meaning. Topics include: the identification of meaning with truth conditions, the nature of propositions, theories of linguistic understanding, the roles of mind and world in determining meaning.
PHI 137C
Philosophy of Language: Semantics & Pragmatics
One course in Philosophy or Linguistics recommended.
Philosophical issues and positions concerning the meaning and use of language. Topics include the distinction between meaning and implication, the roles of context and convention in language use, speaker meaning versus linguistic meaning and speech act theory.
PHI 141
Socrates & the Socratic Dialogue
PHI 021 recommended.
Philosophy of Socrates as found in the Socratic dialogues of Plato. Topics include the Socratic practice of refutation, its method, epistemological foundation, and moral purpose; Socratic eudaimonism and Socratic virtue theory; the paradoxes of Socratic intellectualism.
PHI 143
Hellenistic Philosophy
PHI 021 recommended.
Positions and arguments of the major philosophical schools of the Hellenistic period: Stoicism, Epicureanism, and Scepticism. Focus is on ethical, epistemological and metaphysical questions and their interconnectedness. 
PHI 145
Christian, Islamic, & Jewish Philosophers of the Middle Ages
PHI 021 recommended.
Major Christian, Islamic, and Jewish philosophers of the Middle Ages.
PHI 151
19th-Century European Philosophy
PHI 022 recommended.
Survey of the main movements in 19th-century philosophy on the European continent. Idealism in Schopenhauer and Hegel, dialectical materialism in Marx, irrationalism in Kierkegaard, Nietzsche and Dostoevsky.
PHI 156
Contemporary Analytic Philosophy
One course in Philosophy recommended.
Consideration of central issues such as meaning/reference, analytic/synthetic, reductionism, formal and ordinary language, essential properties, ontological commitment, possible world semantics; influential works by philosophers such as Russell, Moore, Wittgenstein, Austin, Carnap, Quine, Putnam, Kripke, van Fraassen.
PHI 157
20th-Century European Philosophy
One course in Philosophy recommended.
Survey of the main movements in 20th-century philosophy on the European continent, including phenomenology, existentialism, post-structuralism and post-modernism. Philosophers covered are Husserl, Heidegger, Sartre, Foucault, Derrida. 
PHI 160
Pre-Socratics
PHI 021 recommended.
Study of the metaphysical views of such pre-Socratic figures as the Milesians, the Pythagoreans, Heracleitus, Parmenides, Empedocles, Anaxagoras, and the atomists.
PHI 161
Plato
PHI 021 recommended.
Examines Platos most important contributions in metaphysics, epistemology, psychology, cosmology, ethics and political philosophy. Dialogues will be selected from Platos middle and later writings.
PHI 162
Aristotle
PHI 021 recommended.
Overview of Aristotles most central and influential writings. Topics selected from fields such as metaphysics, physics, ethics, logic, and psychology.
PHI 168
Descartes
PHI 022 recommended.
Philosophical writings of Ren Descartes. Topics include the refutation of skepticism, the nature and existence of mind and body, the existence of God, and the foundations of science.
PHI 170
Spinoza & Leibniz
PHI 022 recommended.
Philosophical writings of Spinoza and Leibniz in the 17th century. Topics drawn from both philosophers include: the nature and existence of God, the nature of mind, the relation between mind and body, human freedom, metaphysical monism vs. pluralism.
PHI 172
Locke & Berkeley
PHI 022 recommended.
Principal metaphysical works of John Locke and George Berkeley. Topics include abstract ideas, existence of matter, primary and secondary qualities, essence, substance, the existence of God, and the nature of scientific knowledge.
PHI 174
Hume
PHI 022 recommended.
David Hume's Treatise of Human Nature and related writings. Topics include empiricism, space, causality, belief, skepticism, the passions, and morality.
PHI 175
Kant
PHI 022 recommended.
Immanuel Kant's Critique of Pure Reason and related writings. Topics include the nature of human cognition, space and time, a priori concepts, substance, causality, human freedom, and the existence of God.
PHI 178
Frege
Consent of Instructor.  One upper division course in Philosophy recommended.
Development of Gottlob Frege's views about language and logic. Formulation of his grand mathematical idea known as logicism and how it led to the philosophy of language.
PHI 189A
Special Topics in Philosophy: History of Philosophy
One course in the area of the special topic recommended.
Special topics in History of Philosophy.
PHI 189B
Special Topics in Philosophy: Metaphysics
One course in the area of the special topic recommended.
Special topics in Metaphysics.
PHI 189C
Special Topics in Philosophy: Theory of Knowledge
One course in the area of the special topic recommended.
Special topics in Theory of Knowledge.
PHI 189D
Special Topics in Philosophy: Ethics
One course in the area of the special topic recommended.
Special topics in Ethics.
PHI 189E
Special Topics in Philosophy: Political Philosophy
One course in the area of the special topic recommended.
Special topics in Political Philosophy.
PHI 189F
Special Topics in Philosophy: Philosophy of Law
One course in the area of the special topic recommended.
Special topics in Philosophy of Law.
PHI 189G
Special Topics in Philosophy: Aesthetics
One course in the area of the special topic recommended.
Special topics in Aesthetics.
PHI 189H
Special Topics in Philosophy: Philosophy of Mind
One course in the area of the special topic recommended.
Special topics in Philosophy of Mind.
PHI 189I
Special Topics in Philosophy: Philosophy of Science
One course in the area of the special topic recommended.
Special Topics in Philosophy of Science.
PHI 189J
Special Topics in Philosophy: Philosophy of Language
One course in the area of the special topic recommended.
Special topics in Philosophy of Language.
PHI 189K
Special Topics in Philosophy: Logic
One course in the area of the special topic recommended.
Special topics in Logic.
PHI 194HA
Honors Research Project
Consent of Instructor.  Open to students who are members of the honors program in Philosophy.
Completion of honors research project under direction of an instructor. Consult departmental major advisor for list of instructors available in a given quarter.
PHI 194HB
Research Project
Consent of Instructor.  Open to students who are members of the honors program in Philosophy.
Completion of honors research project under direction of an instructor. Consult departmental major advisor for list of instructors available in a given quarter.
PHI 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

PHI 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

PHI 200A
Proseminar I
Consent of Instructor.Open only to students in their first quarter of the Philosophy Ph.D. program.
Intensive study of core works in a selected area of philosophy. Intensive experience in philosophical writing, discussion, and presentation of written work.
PHI 200B
Proseminar II
Consent of Instructor.Open only to students in their first quarter of the Philosophy Ph.D. program.
Intensive study of core works in a selected area of philosophy. Intensive experience in philosophical writing, discussion, and presentation of written work.
PHI 201
Metaphysics
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Topics vary from quarter to quarter and may include the following: What are things? Do names refer to things? If so, how? Do things have essential properties? What is the nature of necessity? 
PHI 202
Theory of Knowledge
Graduate standing in Philosophy or consent of instructor.
Topics vary from quarter to quarter. Sample topics include belief, skepticism, justification, externalism, naturalized epistemology.
PHI 203
Philosophy of Mind
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Topics in the philosophy of mind, such as the mind-body problem, mental representation, consciousness, intentionality.
PHI 203P
Philosophy of Mind Practicum
Consent of Instructor.
Specific research conducted and prepared for publication by advanced students in a team setting. Topics include knowledge representation and learning in neural networks, the nature and formal properties of mental representation. 
PHI 207
Philosophy of Physics
Graduate standing in Philosophy or consent of instructor.
Intensive treatment of one (or more) topic(s) in the philosophy of physics, such as foundations of spacetime theories, the interpretation of quantum mechanics, or foundations of statistical mechanics. 
PHI 208
Philosophy of Biology
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Intensive treatment of one (or more) topic(s) in the philosophy of biology, such as foundations of evolutionary theories, reductionism in biology, sociobiology and cultural evolution. 
PHI 210
Philosophy of Science
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Treatment of one or more general topics of current interest in philosophy of science. Topics may include scientific explanation, theories of confirmation, scientific realism, reduction in physics and biology. 
PHI 212
Philosophy of Logic & Mathematics
PHI 112 or PHI 113 or MAT 108;  or MAT 125 (Discontinued) or the equivalent.
Philosophical issues in logic and math. Topics may include nature of logical and mathematical truth or knowledge, correctness of logical systems, foundations of mathematics, metaphysical and epistemological presuppositions, applications to philosophical problems and formalization of philosophical theories.
PHI 213
Advanced Logic for Graduate Students
Graduate standing in Philosophy.Enrollment in the Philosophy Ph.D. program.
Intensive study of advanced logic, including set theory, metatheory of predicate logic, and modal logic.
PHI 214
Ethics
Graduate standing in Philosophy or consent of instructor.
Topics may include morality and motivation, objectivity in ethics, the relationship between the factual and the moral. Topics vary from quarter to quarter. 
PHI 217
Political Philosophy
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Advanced studies in political philosophy. Topics vary but may include distributive justice, enforcement of morality by the state, equality, obligation to obey the law, social contract theory. 
PHI 220
Environmental Ethics
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Intensive treatment of one or more topic(s) in environmental ethics, such as biodiversity, sustainability, composition of the moral community, invasive species, endangered species, applications of ethical theories to contemporary environmental issues.
PHI 237
Philosophy of Language
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Study of philosophical issues raised by language, such as the nature of semantic content, proper semantics for verbs of propositional attitude, feasibility and limitations of formal semantics and pragmatics for natural languages. 
PHI 261
Plato
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Advanced seminar designed for analysis of arguments, doctrines, and texts from Plato's works.  Methods of argumentation and interpretation are especially stressed.  Topics vary according to instructor.
PHI 262
Aristotle
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Advanced seminar designed for analysis of arguments, doctrines, and texts from Aristotle's works. Methods of argumentation and interpretation are especially stressed. Topics vary according to instructor.
PHI 275
Kant
Graduate standing in Philosophy or consent of instructor.
Intensive study of a topic in the philosophy of Kant, in such areas as metaphyics, theory of knowledge, ethics.  
PHI 290
History of Philosophy
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Topics in the history of philosophy. Topics vary according to instructor from quarter to quarter. 
PHI 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

PHI 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.

PHI 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Graduate standing.

PHR 092
Internship in Veterinary Science
Approval of project prior to period of internship by faculty sponsor.
Supervised work experience in reproduction.
PHR 106
Human-Animal Interactions: Benefits & Issues
Upper division standing or consent of instructor.
Contributions of animals to human society, including historic, anthropologic, developmental, human health and therapeutic perspectives, as well as effects of humans on animals. One field trip required.
PHR 192
Internship in Veterinary Science
Upper division standing; approval of project prior to period of internship.
Supervised work experience in Reproduction.
PHR 202
Sampling in Health-Related Research
MPM 403;  and Consent of Instructor.  Or the equivalent.
A very thorough coverage of simple random sampling, stratified sampling, cluster sampling, systematic sampling and other sampling methods applied extensively in epidemiology and other health-related disciplines. Emphasis on application of the sampling methods.
PHR 203
Multivariate Biostatistics
MPM 403;  MPM 404;  and Consent of Instructor.  Or the equivalent.
Multivariate procedures covered are principal component analysis, factor analysis, Two-group and k-group multivariate ANOVA, multivariateregression, Two-group and k-group discriminant analysis and repeated measures analysis, cluster analysis, and canonical analysis. Emphasis is on application of procedures.
PHR 212
Epidemiology of the Zoonoses
Graduate standing or third-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine or consent of instructor.
Epidemiological, biological and ecological features of some major infections shared by humans and other animals.  Wildlife and domestic animals zoonoses of major health and economic significance are presented to illustrate how knowledge of zoonoses epidemiology is essential for implementing control measures.
PHR 241
Advanced Topics in Canine Genetics & Genomics
GGG 201A;  GGG 201C;  Or equivalents, with consent of instructor.Limited enrollment.
In-depth study of topics in canine genomics and genetics. Topics will vary annually, but can include positional cloning, whole genome association, complex traits and linkage disequilibrium. Students will lead discussions on assigned readings.
PHR 243
Advanced Topics in Conservation Genetics
Undergraduate genetics and ecology or consent of instructor.Restricted to 16 students.
In-depth study of topics related to the application of genetic tools to wildlife conservation. Topics will vary annually, but may include use of non-invasive methods of genetic assessment and monitoring of wildlife populations. Students will lead discussions on assigned readings.
PHR 266
Applied Analytic Epidemiology
MPM 404;  or Consent of Instructor.
Principles and applications in analysis of epidemiologic data.  Methods of analyzing stratified and matched data, logistic regression for cohort and case-control studies, Poisson regression, survival-time methods.
PHR 277
Mathematical Models in Epidemiology
MPM 403;  (EPI 205A or MPM 405);  Consent of instructor; although not required, students are encouraged to refresh their knowledge of high school calculus and differential equations.Limited to 30 students.
Theory of epidemics and mathematical modeling concepts for infectious diseases to include discrete and continuous time models, their use to explore disease dynamics and investigate prevention and control strategies for human and veterinary infectious diseases.
PHY 001A
Principles of Physics
Trigonometry or consent of instructor.
Mechanics. Introduction to general principles and analytical methods used in physics with emphasis on applications in applied agricultural and biological sciences and in physical education.
PHY 001B
Principles of Physics
PHY 001A or PHY 009A.Not open for credit to students who have received credit for PHY 007A, PHY 007B, PHY 007C, PHY 009B, PHY 009C, or PHY 009D.
Continuation of PHY 001A. Heat, optics, electricity, modern physics.
PHY 007A
General Physics
MAT 016B (can be concurrent) or MAT 017B (can be concurrent) or MAT 021B (can be concurrent);  Completion or concurrent enrollment in MAT 016B or MAT 017B or MAT 021B.
Introduction to general principles and analytical methods used in physics for students majoring in a biological science.
PHY 007B
General Physics
PHY 007A.
Continuation of PHY 007A. 
PHY 007C
General Physics
PHY 007B.
Continuation of PHY 007B. 
PHY 009A
Classical Physics
MAT 021B or MAT 021M;  or Consent of Instructor.
Introduction to general principles and analytical methods used in physics for physical science and engineering majors. Classical mechanics.
PHY 009B
Classical Physics
PHY 009A;  MAT 021C;  MAT 021D (can be concurrent).
Continuation of PHY 009B. Fluid mechanics, thermodynamics, wave phenomena, optics.
PHY 009C
Classical Physics
PHY 009B;  MAT 021D;  MAT 022A (can be concurrent).
Electricity and magnetism including circuits and Maxwell's equations.
PHY 009D
Modern Physics
PHY 009C;  MAT 022A;  MAT 022B recommended (may be taken concurrently).Not open for credit to students who have completed PHY 009HB, 009HC, or 009HE.
Introduction to physics concepts developed since 1900. Special relativity, quantum mechanics, atoms, molecules, condensed matter, nuclear and particle physics.
PHY 009HA
Honors Physics
MAT 021B (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.
Classical mechanics. Same material as PHY 009A in greater depth. For students in physical sciences, mathematics, and engineering.
PHY 009HB
Honors Physics
(PHY 009HA or PHY 009A);  MAT 021C (can be concurrent).
Special relativity, thermal physics. Continuation of PHY 009HA.
PHY 009HC
Honors Physics
PHY 009HB;  MAT 021D (can be concurrent).
Waves, sound, optics, quantum physics. Continuation of Physics 9HB.
PHY 009HD
Honors Physics
PHY 009HC;  MAT 021D.
Electricity and magnetism.  Continuation of Physics 9HC.
PHY 009HE
Honors Physics
PHY 009HD;  MAT 022B (can be concurrent).
Application of quantum mechanics.  
PHY 010
Topics in Physics for Nonscientists
High school algebra.
Emphasis varies: survey of basic principles or a deeper exploration of some particular branch. Past topics included black holes, space time, and relativity; physics of music; history and philosophy; energy and the environment; and natural phenomena. 
PHY 030
Fractals, Chaos and Complexity
MAT 016A or MAT 021A.
Modern ideas about the unifying ideas of fractal geometry, chaos and complexity.  Basic theory and applications with examples from physics, earth sciences, mathematics, population dynamics, ecology, history, economics, biology, computer science, art and architecture.
PHY 030
Fractals, Chaos & Complexity
MAT 016A or MAT 017A or MAT 021A.
Modern ideas about the unifying ideas of fractal geometry, chaos and complexity.  Basic theory and applications with examples from physics, earth sciences, mathematics, population dynamics, ecology, history, economics, biology, computer science, art and architecture.
PHY 080
Experimental Techniques
PHY 009D or PHY 009HD.Open to Physics and Applied Physics majors only.
Experimental techniques. Design of circuits. Data analysis, sources of noise,  statistical and systematic uncertainties. Light sources, detection, and measurement in basic optical systems.
PHY 090X
Lower Division Seminar
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.Limited enrollment.
Examination of a special topic in Physics through shared readings, discussions, written assignments, or special activities such as laboratory work.
PHY 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.  Primary for lower division students.

PHY 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

PHY 102
Computational Laboratory in Physics
MAT 021D;  ECS 030;  (PHY 009D or PHY 009HD);  PHY 104A (can be concurrent);  MAT 22AB; PHY 104A required concurrently.
Introduction to computational physics and to the computational resources in the physics department. Preparation for brief programming assignments required in other upper division physics classes.
PHY 102
Computational Laboratory in Physics
MAT 021D;  MAT 022A;  MAT 022B;  (PHY 009D or PHY 009HD);  PHY 040;  PHY 104A (can be concurrent).
Introduction to computational physics and to the computational resources in the physics department. Preparation for brief programming assignments required in other upper division physics classes.
PHY 104A
Introductory Methods of Mathematical Physics
(PHY 009B C- or better,  PHY 009C C- or better,  PHY 009D C- or better);  (MAT 021D C- or better,  MAT 022A C- or better,  MAT 022B C- or better);  or Consent of Instructor.
Introduction to the mathematics used in upper division physics courses, including applications of vector spaces, Fourier analysis, partial differential equations. 
PHY 104B
Computational Methods of Mathematical Physics
PHY 104A C- or better;  PHY 105AL;  or Consent of Instructor.
Introduction to the use of computational techniques to solve the mathematical problems that arise in advanced physics courses, complementing the analytical approaches emphasized in PHY 104A.
PHY 104C
Intermediate Methods of Mathematical Physics
PHY 104A C- or better;  or Consent of Instructor.
Applications of complex analysis, conditional probability, integral transformations and other advanced topics.
PHY 105A
Analytical Mechanics
(PHY 009B C or better,  PHY 009C C or better,  PHY 009D C or better);  (MAT 021D C or better,  MAT 022A C or better,  MAT 022B C or better);  Or consent of department for any of the courses.
Principles and applications of Newtonian mechanics; introduction to Lagranges and Hamiltons equations
PHY 105B
Analytical Mechanics
PHY 104A C or better;  PHY 105A C or better;  Or consent of department for any of the courses.
Principles and applications of Newtonian mechanics; introduction to Lagranges and Hamiltons equations
PHY 105C
Continuum Mechanics
PHY 104A C- or better;  PHY 105A C- or better;  or Consent of Instructor.
The continuum hypothesis and limitations, tensors, isotropic constitutive equations, and wave propagation.  Applications such as elastic solids,heat flow, aerodynamics, and ocean waves.
PHY 108
Optics
((PHY 009A,  PHY 009B,  PHY 009C,  PHY 009D) or (PHY 007A,  PHY 007B,  PHY 007C));  (MAT 021A,  MAT 021B,  MAT 021C,  MAT 021D);  or Consent of Instructor.
The phenomena of diffraction, interference, and polarization of light, with applications to current problems in astrophysics, material science,and atmospheric science. Study of modern optical instrumentation. Open to non-majors.
PHY 108L
Optics Laboratory
PHY 108 (can be concurrent);  PHY 108 required concurrently.
The laboratory will consist of one major project pursued throughout the quarter, based on modern applications of optical techniques.
PHY 110A
Electricity & Magnetism
(PHY 009B C- or better,  PHY 009C C- or better,  PHY 009D C- or better) or (PHY 009HB C- or better,  PHY 009HC C- or better,  PHY 009HD C- or better,  PHY 009HE C- or better);  MAT 021D C- or better;  MAT 022A C- or better;  MAT 022B C- or better;  PHY 104A;  PHY 105A;  or consent of department.
Theory of electrostatics, electromagnetism, Maxwell's equations, electromagnetic waves.
PHY 110B
Electricity & Magnetism
PHY 110A C- or better;  PHY 104A C- or better;  Or consent of department.
Theory of electrostatics, electromagnetism, Maxwell's equations, electromagnetic waves.
PHY 110C
Electricity & Magnetism
PHY 110B C- or better;  Or consent of department.
Theory of electrostatics, electromagnetism, Maxwell's equations, electromagnetic waves.
PHY 112
Thermodynamics & Statistical Mechanics
PHY 115A;  Or the equivalent.
Introduction to classical and quantum statistical mechanics and their connections with thermodynamics. Theory is developed for the ideal gas model and simple magnetic models and then extended to studies of solids, quantum fluids, and chemical equilibria.
PHY 115A
Foundation of Quantum Mechanics
PHY 104A C- or better;  PHY 105A C- or better;  Or consent of department.
Introduction to the methods of quantum mechanics with applications to atomic, molecular, solid state, nuclear and elementary particle physics.  Extensive problem solving.
PHY 115B
Applications of Quantum Mechanics
PHY 115A C- or better;  Or consent of department.
Angular momentum and spin; hydrogen atom and atomic spectra; perturbation theory; scattering theory.
PHY 116A
Electronic Instrumentation
PHY 009C;  MAT 022B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Experimental and theoretical study of important analog electronic circuits.  Linear circuits, transmission lines, input impedance, feedback, amplifiers, oscillators, noise.
PHY 116B
Electronic Instrumentation
PHY 009C or PHY 009HD;  or Consent of Instructor.
Continuation of PHY 116A. Introduction to the use of digital electronics and microcomputers in experimental physics.  Nonlinear electronics, integrated circuits, analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog converters, transducers, actuators.
PHY 116C
Introduction to Computer-Based Experiments in Physics
(PHY 009D or PHY 009HD);  PHY 116B;  MAT 022B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Introduction to techniques for making physical measurements using computer-based instrumentation.
PHY 122A
Advanced Laboratory in Condensed Matter Physics
PHY 104A;  PHY 105A;  PHY 110B;  PHY 115A;  PHY 112 (can be concurrent);  PHY 080;  Or consent of the department.Registration by Permission to Add (PTA) number only; priority given to graduating PHY and APP majors.
Experimental techniques and measurements in solid-state physics. Three-six experiments performed depending on difficulty. Individual work is stressed. Thorough write-ups of the experiments are required.
PHY 122B
Advanced Laboratory in Particle Physics
PHY 104A;  PHY 105A;  PHY 110B;  PHY 115A;  PHY 112 (can be concurrent);  PHY 080;  Or consent of the department.Registration by Permission to Add (PTA) number only; priority given to graduating PHY and APP majors.
Experimental techniques and measurements in nuclear and particle physics. Students perform three to six experiments depending on difficulty. Individual work is stressed. Thorough write-ups of the experiments are required.
PHY 123
Signals & Noise in Physics
PHY 009A;  PHY 009B;  PHY 009C;  PHY 009D;  PHY 104A;  or Consent of Instructor.Not open to students who have taken this course previously as course 198.
Techniques of measurement and analysis designed to avoid systematic error and maximize signal/noise ratio. Illustrative examples of optimal filters ranging from condensed matter to cosmology.
PHY 129A
Introduction to Nuclear Physics
PHY 115A C- or better;  or Consent of Instructor.
Survey of basic nuclear properties and concepts requiring introductoryalpha, beta and gamma decay.
PHY 129B
Nuclear Physics, Extensions & Applications
PHY 129A.
Continuation of PHY 129A. Nuclear reactions, neutrons, fission, fusion accelerators, introduction to meson and particle physics, nuclear astrophysics, and applications of nuclear physics and techniques to mass spectrometry, nuclear medicine, trace element analysis.
PHY 130A
Elementary Particle Physics
PHY 115A C- or better;  or Consent of Instructor.
Properties and classification of elementary particles and their interactions. Experimental techniques. Conservation laws and symmetries. Strong, electromagnetic, and weak interactions. Introduction to Feynman calculus.
PHY 130B
Elementary Particle Physics
PHY 115A C- or better;  or Consent of Instructor.
Properties and classification of elementary particles and their interactions. Experimental techniques. Conservation laws and symmetries. Strong, electromagnetic, and weak interactions. Introduction to Feynman calculus.
PHY 140A
Introduction to Solid State Physics
PHY 115A C- or better;  or Consent of Instructor.  Or equivalent course passed with C- or better.
Survey of fundamental ideas in the physics of solids, with selected device applications. Crystal structure, x-ray and neutron diffraction, phonons, simple metals, energy bands and Fermi surfaces, semiconductors, optical properties, magnetism, superconductivity.
PHY 140B
Introduction to Solid State Physics
PHY 115A C- or better;  or Consent of Instructor.  Or equivalent course passed with C- or better.
Survey of fundamental ideas in the physics of solids, with selected device applications. Crystal structure, x-ray and neutron diffraction, phonons, simple metals, energy bands and Fermi surfaces, semiconductors, optical properties, magnetism, superconductivity.
PHY 150
Special Topics in Physics
(PHY 009A,  PHY 009B,  PHY 009C,  PHY 009D) or (PHY 009HA,  PHY 009HB,  PHY 009HC,  PHY 009HD,  PHY 009HE);  or Consent of Instructor.
Topics vary, covering areas of contemporary research in physics.
PHY 151
Stellar Structure & Evolution
PHY 009A;  PHY 009B;  PHY 009C;  PHY 009D;  or Consent of Instructor.
Chemical composition, structure, energy sources and evolutionary history of stars, with equal emphasis on both the observational data and theoretical models, including black holes, neutron stars and white dwarfs and the formation of substellar masses.
PHY 152
Galactic Structure & the Interstellar Medium
PHY 009A;  PHY 009B;  PHY 009C;  PHY 009D;  PHY 105A (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.  PHY 105A required concurrently.
Structure, contents, and formation of our Milky Way galaxy, viz. its shape and size, the nature of the interstellar medium, stellar populations, rotation curves, mass determination and evidence of dark matter.
PHY 153
Extragalactic Astrophysics
PHY 009A;  PHY 009B;  PHY 009C;  PHY 009D;  PHY 104A;  PHY 105A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Structure and evolution of galaxies and clusters of galaxies, including distance and mass determination, galaxy types and environments, active galactic nuclei and quasars, gravitational lensing and dark matter, global cosmological properties.
PHY 154
Astrophysical Applications of Physics
PHY 105A;  PHY 105B;  PHY 110B (can be concurrent);  PHY 115A (can be concurrent);  PHY 112;  PHY 112 or consent of instructor; PHY 110B and PHY 115A required concurrently.Not open to students who have taken this course previously as PHY 198.
Applications of classical and quantum mechanics, thermodynamics, statistical mechanics, and electricity and magnetism to astrophysical settings such as the Big Bang, degenerate white dwarf and neutron stars, and solar neutrinos.
PHY 155
General Relativity
PHY 104A;  PHY 105A;  PHY 105B;  PHY 110A;  PHY 105B and PHY 110A or consent of instructor.
Definition of the mathematical frame work for the description of the gravitational field, introduction of the dynamical equations of Einstein governing its evolution and review of the key solutions, including black holes and expanding universes.
PHY 156
Introduction to Cosmology
PHY 009A;  PHY 009B;  PHY 009C;  PHY 009D;  PHY 105A (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.  PHY 105A required concurrently.
Contemporary knowledge regarding the origin of the universe, including the Big Bang and nucleosynthesis, microwave background radiation, formation of cosmic structure, cosmic inflation, cosmic acceleration and dark energy.
PHY 157
Astronomy Instrumentation and Data Analysis Laboratory
PHY 104A;  PHY 105A;  PHY 110A;  PHY 115A (can be concurrent);  PHY 110B (can be concurrent);  and Consent of Instructor.Registration by Permission to Add (PTA) number only; priority given to graduating PHY astrophysics emphasis seniors.
Experimental techniques, data acquisition and analysis involving laboratory astrophysics plus stellar, nebular and galaxy digital imaging, photometry and/or spectroscopy. Students perform three experiments. Individual work stressed. Minimum 10-15 page journal style articles of two experiments are required.
PHY 157
Astronomy Instrumentation & Data Analysis Laboratory
PHY 080;  PHY 104A;  PHY 105A;  PHY 110A;  PHY 110B (can be concurrent);  PHY 115A (can be concurrent);  and consent of department.Registration by Permission to Add (PTA) number only; priority given to graduating PHY astrophysics emphasis seniors.
Experimental techniques, data acquisition and analysis involving laboratory astrophysics plus stellar, nebular and galaxy digital imaging, photometry and/or spectroscopy. Students perform three experiments. Individual work stressed. Minimum 10-15 page journal style articles of two experiments are required.
PHY 158
Formation of Galaxies & Cosmic Structures
(PHY 009A or PHY 009HA C- or better);  (PHY 009B or PHY 009HB C- or better);  (PHY 009C or PHY 009HC C- or better);  (PHY 009D or PHY 009HD C- or better);  PHY 104A C- or better;  PHY 105A C- or better;  or Consent of Instructor.
Formation of the cosmic web, including dark-matter halos and galaxies within them. Components of the Universe (dark matter, gas, stars) and their dynamical evolution. Gravitational collapse and virialization. Gas dynamics, heating, and cooling. Galactic star formation and stellar dynamics. Emphasis on theoretical concepts, computational methods, and simulations.
PHY 160
Environmental Physics & Society
(PHY 009D or PHY 007C);  (PHY 010 or PHY 001B);  MAT 016B;  Or the equivalent.
Impact of humankind on the environment are discussed from the point of view of the physical sciences. Calculations based on physical principles will be made, and the resulting policy implications are considered.
PHY 192
Internship in Physics
consent of instructor/Physics Internship Director.Enrollment dependent on availability of intern positions; open to Physics majors only.
Supervised work experience requiring the application of physics principles and techniques in a professional setting, including but not limited to industry and national laboratories.
PHY 194HA
Special Study for Honors Students
Consent of Instructor.
Open only to Physics and Applied Physics majors who satisfy the College of Letters and Science requirements for entrance into the Honors Program. Independent research project at a level significantly beyond that defined by the normal physics curriculum.
PHY 194HB
Special Study for Honors Students
Consent of Instructor.
Open only to Physics and Applied Physics majors who satisfy the College of Letters and Science requirements for entrance into the Honors Program. Independent research project at a level significantly beyond that defined by the normal physics curriculum.
PHY 195
Senior Thesis
Consent of Instructor.
Open only to Physics and Applied Physics majors with senior standing. Preparation of a senior thesis on a topic selected by the student with approval of the department.
PHY 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

PHY 200A
Theory of Mechanics & Electromagnetics
PHY 204A (can be concurrent);  PHY 104B;  PHY 105B;  PHY 110C;  Or equivalent to PHY 110C; PHY 204A required concurrently.
Theoretical approaches in classical mechanics including the use of generalized coordinates and virtual work; variational calculus; Lagrange equations; symmetries, conservation laws, and Noether theorem; Lagrangian density; Hamilton formalism; canonical transformations; Poisson brackets; and Hamilton-Jacobi equations.
PHY 200B
Theory of Mechnics & Electromagnetics
PHY 200A;  PHY 204B (can be concurrent);  PHY 204B concurrently.
Theoretical approaches in electromagnetics including static electromagnetic fields; Maxwell's equations; plane waves in various media; magnetohydrodynamics; diffraction theory; radiating systems; and special relativity.
PHY 200C
Theory of Mechanics & Electromagnetics
PHY 200A;  PHY 204B (can be concurrent);  PHY 204B concurrently.
Theoretical approaches in electromagnetics including static electromagnetic fields; Maxwell's equations; plane waves in various media; magnetohydrodynamics; diffraction theory; radiating systems; and special relativity.
PHY 204A
Methods of Mathematical Physics
PHY 104A;  Or the equivalent.
Linear vector spaces, operators and their spectral analysis, complete sets of functions, complex variables, functional analysis, Greens functions, calculus of variations, introduction to numerical analysis.
PHY 204B
Methods of Mathematical Physics
PHY 104A;  PHY 104B;  Or the equivalent.
Linear vector spaces, operators and their spectral analysis, complete sets of functions, complex variables, functional analysis, Green's functions, calculus of variations, introduction to numerical analysis.
PHY 210
Computational Physics
Knowledge of Fortran or C.
Analytic techniques to solve differential equations and eignevalue problems. Physics content of course will be self-contained, and adjusted according to background of students.
PHY 215A
Quantum Mechanics
PHY 115B;  Or the equivalent.
Formal development and interpretation of non-relativistic quantum mechanics; its application to atomic, nuclear, molecular, and solid-state problems; brief introduction to relativistic quantum mechanics and the Dirac equation.
PHY 215B
Quantum Mechanics
PHY 115B;  Or the equivalent.
Formal development and interpretation of non-relativistic quantum mechanics; its application to atomic, nuclear, molecular, and solid-state problems; brief introduction to relativistic quantum mechanics and the Dirac equation.
PHY 215C
Quantum Mechanics
PHY 115B;  Or the equivalent.
Formal development and interpretation of non-relativistic quantum mechanics; its application to atomic, nuclear, molecular, and solid-state problems; brief introduction to relativistic quantum mechanics and the Dirac equation.
PHY 219A
Statistical Mechanics
PHY 215B;  Or equivalent.
Foundations of thermodynamics and classical and quantum statistical mechanics with simple applications to properties of solids, real gases, nuclear matter, etc. and a brief introduction to phase transitions.
PHY 219B
Statistical Mechanics
PHY 219A.
Further applications of thermodynamics and classical and quantum statistical mechanics. The modern theory of fluctuations about the equilibrium state, phase transitions and critical phenomena.
PHY 223A
Group Theoretical Methods of Physics-Condensed Matter
PHY 215A;  PHY 215B;  PHY 215C (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.  PHY 215C required concurrently.
Theory of groups and their representations with applications in condensed matter.
PHY 223B
Group Theoretical Methods of Physics-Elementary Particles
PHY 215A;  PHY 215B;  PHY 215C (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.  PHY 215C required concurrently.
Theory of groups and their representations with applications in elementary particle physics.
PHY 224A
Nuclear Physics
PHY 215B.
Comprehensive study of the nucleon-nucleon interaction including the deuteron, nucleon-nucleon scattering, polarization, determination of real parameters of Smatrix, and related topics.
PHY 224B
Nuclear Physics
PHY 224A.
Study of nuclear models, including shell model, collective model, unified model. Energy level spectra, static momenta, and electromagnetic transition rates.
PHY 224C
Nuclear Physics
PHY 224B.
Study of nuclear scattering and reactions including the optical model and direct interactions. Beta decay and an introduction to weak interactions.
PHY 229A
Advanced Nuclear Theory
PHY 224C.
Advanced topics in nuclear theory; theory of quantum-mechanical scattering processes. Exact formal theory and models for two-body scattering.
PHY 229B
Advanced Nuclear Theory
PHY 229A.
Advanced topics in nuclear theory; theory of quantum-mechanical scattering processes. Exact formal theory and models for three-body scattering.
PHY 230A
Quantum Theory of Fields
PHY 215C.
Relativistic quantum mechanics of particles; techniques and applications of second quantization; Feynman diagrams; renormalization.
PHY 230B
Quantum Theory of Fields
PHY 230A.
Continuation of 230A, with selected advanced topics, such as S-matrix theory, dispersion relations, axiomatic formulations.
PHY 230C
Quantum Theory of Fields
PHY 230A;  PHY 230B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Renormalization theory and applications, including dimensional regularization, Ward identities, renormalization group equations, coupling constant unification, and precision electroweak calculations.
PHY 232
Topics in String Theory
Graduate standing in Physics or consent of instructor. PHY 230A, PHY 230B, PHY 230C & PHY 260 or equivalent are strongly recommended.
Current research trends in string theory, with topics ranging from perturbative worldsheet methods, nonperturbative aspects and dualities, AdS/CFT correspondence, string field theory, etc. 
PHY 233
Advanced Topics in Geometry & Physics
PHY 230A, PHY 230B, PHY 230C, & PHY 260 or equivalent strongly recommended.Graduate standing in Physics or consent of instructor required.
Modern geometric methods in theoretical physics, with topics ranging from from pseudo-Riemannian differential geometry and topology with application to general relativity, black holes, and string theory.
PHY 240A
 Condensed Matter Physics A
PHY 215C;  PHY 219A;  PHY 140A & PHY 140B or equivalent recommended.
Topics in condensed matter physics: Crystal structure; one-electron theory; transport and optical properties of semiconductors; phonons, electron-phonon scattering.
PHY 240B
Condensed Matter Physics B
PHY 240A.
Topics in condensed matter physics: transport and optical properties of metals and quantum structures; experimental measurement the Fermi surface and of phonon spectra.
PHY 240C
Condensed Matter Physics
PHY 240A;  PHY 240B.
Review of second quantization.  Interacting electron gas, electron-phonon interaction and effects, including instabilities of electronic systems.  Topics in the theory of superconductivity and magnetism.
PHY 241
Advanced Topics in Magnetism
PHY 240A;  PHY 240B;  PHY 240C;  PHY 240D;  or Consent of Instructor.
Topics chosen from areas of current research interest.
PHY 242
Advanced Topics in Superconductivity
PHY 240A;  PHY 240B;  PHY 240C;  PHY 240D;  or Consent of Instructor.
Topics chosen from areas of current research interest.
PHY 243A
Surface Physics of Materials
PHY 140A;  PHY 140B;  PHY 115A;  PHY 115B;  Or the equivalent to any; PHY 215A, PHY 240A, or the equivalents recommended.
Experimental and theoretical fundamentals of surface and interface physics and chemistry, including electronic and magnetic structure, thermodynamics, adsorption kinetics, epitaxial growth, and a discussion of various spectroscopic and structural probes based on photons, electrons, ions, and scanning probes.
PHY 243B
Surface Physics of Materials
PHY 140A;  PHY 140B;  PHY 115A;  PHY 115B;  Or the equivalent to any; PHY 215A, PHY 240A, or the equivalents recommended.
Experimental and theoretical fundamentals of surface and interface physics and chemistry, including electronic and magnetic structure, thermodynamics, adsorption kinetics, epitaxial growth, and a discussion of various spectroscopic and structural probes based on photons, electrons, ions, and scanning probes.
PHY 243C
Surface Physics of Materials
PHY 140A;  PHY 140B;  PHY 115A;  PHY 115B;  Or the equivalent to any; PHY 215A, PHY 240A, or equivalents recommended.
Experimental and theoretical fundamentals of surface and interface physics and chemistry, including electronic and magnetic structure, thermodynamics, adsorption kinetics, epitaxial growth, and a discussion of various spectroscopic and structural probes based on photons, electrons, ions, and scanning probes.
PHY 245A
High-Energy Physics
PHY 230A.
Phenomenology and systematics of strong, electromagnetic, and weak interactions of hadrons and leptons; determination of quantum numbers; quarks and quarkonia; deep inelastic scattering; the quark parton model; experiments at hadron colliders and electron-positron colliders.
PHY 245B
High-Energy Physics
PHY 245A.
Electroweak interactions; phenomenology of the Standard Model of SU(2)LxU(1); weak interaction experiments; properties of and experiments with W and Z vector bosons; Glashow-Weinberg-Salam model and the Higgs boson; introduction to supersymmetry and other speculations.
PHY 245C
Collider Physics
PHY 245A;  PHY 252B (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.  PHY 252B taken previously or concurrently.
Collider physics.  Topics include quark and gluon distribution functions and the computation of cross sections; Large Hadron Collider and International Linear Collider phenomenology; collider and detector characteristics; extracting models from data; software tools for analyzing experimental data.
PHY 246
Supersymmetry: Theory & Phenomenology
PHY 230A, PHY 230B, PHY 245A, PHY 245B recommended, or consent of instructor.
Construction of supersymmetric models of particle physics; superfields; supersymmetry breaking the minimal supersymmetric standard model; supergravity. Collider phenomenology of supersymmetry. Dark matter phenomenology.
PHY 246A
Supersymmetry: Theory & Phenomenology
PHY 230A;  PHY 230B;  PHY 245A, PHY 245B recommended or consent of instructor.
Construction of supersymmetric models of particle physics; superfields; supersymmetry breaking the minimal supersymmetric standard model; supergravity. Collider phenomenology of supersymmetry. Dark matter phenomenology. Not offered every year. 
PHY 246B
Advanced Supersymmetry
PHY 246A.
Advanced topics in supersymmetry.  Topics include holomorphy, the Affleck-Dine-Seiberg superpotential, Seiberg duality for SUSY QCD, dynamical SUSY breaking, Seiberg-Witten theory, superconformal field theories, supergravity, anomaly and gaugino mediation, and the AdS/CFT correspondence.
PHY 250
Special Topics in Physics
Consent of Instructor.
Topic varies. 
PHY 255
Econophysics
Knowledge of Python, R, Excel, Matlab, or consent of instructor.
Application of ideas from statistical mechanics to the financial markets. Market dynamics from a physics and systems perspective, including the statistical distributions of returns, the dynamics of prices, and models for the markets.
PHY 256A
Physics of Information 
Consent of Instructor.  Advanced undergraduate or introductory graduate differential equations, applied linear algebra, and probability theory; e.g., MAT 119A/MAT 119B or MAT 207A, MAT 167 or MAT 226A, and MAT 135A/MAT 135B or MAT 235A, respectively; or in PHY 104A/PHY 104B/PHY 104C or PHY 204A/PHY 204B.Limited to 30 students.
Nonlinear dynamics, deterministic chaos, bifurcations, pattern formation, symbolic dynamics, measurement theory, stochastic processes, elementary information theory, information in complex systems, computational laboratory.
PHY 256B
Physics of Computation
PHY 256A;  Consent of Instructor.  Advanced undergraduate or introductory graduate differential equations, applied linear algebra, and probability theory; e.g., MAT 119A/MAT 119B or MAT 207A, MAT 167 or MAT 226A, and MAT 135A/MAT 135B or MAT 235A, respectively; or in PHY 104A/PHY 104B/PHY 104C or PHY 204A/PHY 204B.Limited to 30 students.
Structural complexity, computational mechanics, information measures, causal inference, applications to complex materials, quantum dynamics, and nonequilibrium thermodynamics, computational laboratory.
PHY 260
Introduction to General Relativity
PHY 200A;  PHY 200B.
An introduction to general relativity. Differential geometry and curved spacetime; the Einstein field equations; gravitational fields of stars and black holes; weak fields and gravitational radiation; experimental tests; Big Bang cosmology.
PHY 262
Early Universe Cosmology
Second year standing in Physics Graduate Program or consent of instructor.
Introduction to early universe cosmology: the Big Bang, inflation, primordial nucleosynthesis, dark matter, dark energy, and other topics of current interest
PHY 263
Cosmic Structure Formation
PHY 260.
Growth of structure from small density inhomogeneities in the early universe to the diverse structures observable today. Use of observable properties (cosmic microwave background, gravitational lensing, peculiar velocities, number density, etc.) to constrain models of structure formation and fundamental physics.
PHY 265
High Energy Astrophysics & Radiative Processes
Graduate standing in Physics or consent of instructor.
Survey covering galactic and extragalactic X-ray and gamma-ray astronomy, radiative processes, and techniques of high-energy astrophysics.
PHY 266
Data Analysis for Astrophysics
Graduate standing in Physics or consent of instructor.
Survey covering measurement and signal analysis techniques for astrophysics and cosmology throughout the electromagnetic spectrum.
PHY 267
Observational Extragalactic Astronomy & Cosmology
Graduate standing in Physics or consent of instructor.
Survey covering current areas of research on extragalactic objects, their physical properties, origin, evolution, and distribution in space.
PHY 268
Research Methods in Astrophysics
PHY 204A, PHY 204B and PHY 215A recommended.Graduate standing in Physics or consent of instructor.
Introduction to research methods in astrophysics and cosmology. Problems and examples from observational and theoretical work will be included.
PHY 270
Current Topics in Physics Research
Graduate standing in Physics or consent of instructor.
Reading and discussion to help physics graduate students develop and maintain familiarity with the current and past literature in their immediate field of research and related areas.
PHY 285
Careers in Physics
Graduate standing in Physics.
Designed to give Physics graduate students an in-depth appreciation of career opportunities with a graduate degree in physics.  Professional physicists, mainly from outside academia, will give seminars describing both research and career insights.
PHY 290
Seminar in Physics
Graduate standing in Physics or consent of instructor.
Presentation and discussion of topics of current research interest in physics. Topics will vary weekly and will cover a broad spectrum of the active fields of physics research at a level accessible to all physics graduate students. 
PHY 291
Seminar in Nuclear Physics
Graduate standing in Physics or consent of instructor.
Presentation and discussion of topics of current research interest in nuclear physics.
PHY 292A
Seminar in Elementary Particle Physics
Graduate standing in Physics or consent of instructor.
Presentation and discussion of topics of current research interest in elementary particle physics.
PHY 292B
High Energy Frontier Initiative & Cosmology Theory Seminar
Physics graduate students.

PHY 293
Seminar in Condensed Matter Physics
Graduate standing in Physics or consent of instructor.
Presentation and discussion of topics of current research interest in condensed matter physics.
PHY 294
Seminar in Cosmology
Graduate standing in Physics or consent of instructor.
Presentation and discussion of topics of current research interest in Cosmology.
PHY 296
Field, Strings, & Gravity Seminar
Consent of Instructor.
Presentation and discussion of topics of current research interest in the areas of quantum field theory, string theory and gravity. 
PHY 297
Research on the Teaching & Learning of Physics
Graduate standing in Physics or consent of instructor.
Discussion and analysis of recent research in how students construct understanding of physics and other science concepts and the implications of this research for instruction.
PHY 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

PHY 371
Teaching in an Active-Engagement Physics Discussion/Lab Setting
PHY 009D;  Or equivalent.Open to graduate students only.
Analysis of recent research on science/physics teaching and learning and its implications for teaching labs, discussions, and discussion/labs with an emphasis on differences between conventional and active-engagement instructional settings.  The appropriate role of the instructor in specific instructional settings.  
PHY 390
Methods of Teaching Physics
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing in Physics.
Practical experience in methods and problems related to teaching physics laboratories at the university level, including discussion of teaching techniques, analysis of quizzes and laboratory reports and related topics. Required of all Physics Teaching Assistants.
PHY 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Graduate standing.

PLB 090X
Plant Science Seminar
Consent of Instructor.
Examination of a special topic in a small group setting.
PLB 092
Internship
Consent of Instructor.
Technical and/or professional experience on or off campus. Supervised by a member of the Plant Biology faculty.
PLB 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Primarily for lower division students.
PLB 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

PLB 102
California Floristics
PLS 002 or BIS 002C;  Or equivalent course in Plant Science.
Survey of the California flora, emphasizing recognition of important plant families and genera and use of taxonomic keys to identify species. Phylogenetic relationships among families. Principles of systematics and taxonomy. Two Saturday field trips.
PLB 105
Developmental Plant Anatomy
BIS 002C;  Or other similar preparation in plant biology.Restricted to 50 students; split equally into two lab groups.
Structural anatomy of vascular plants. Training in basic tissue sectioning, staining, and use of the compound microscope.
PLB 108
Systematics & Evolution of Angiosperms
(BIS 001A,  BIS 001B,  BIS 001C) or (BIS 002A,  BIS 002B,  BIS 002C).
Diversity and classification of angiosperms (flowering plants) on a world scale, and current understanding of the origin of angiosperms and evolutionary relationships and trends within them based on morphological and molecular evidence.
PLB 111
Plant Physiology
(BIS 002A,  BIS 002B,  BIS 002C);  (CHE 008B (can be concurrent) or CHE 118B (can be concurrent));  PHY 007C (can be concurrent);  PLB 105 recommended.
Plant cell as a functional unit. The processes of absorption, movement, and utilization of water and minerals. Water loss, translocation, photosynthesis, respiration.
PLB 111D
Problems in Plant Physiology
PLB 111 (can be concurrent);  PLB 111 required concurrently.
Discussion of problems and applications relating to principles presented in PHY 111. Problems assigned weekly showing novel applications of principles described in PHY 111; repare answers to be delivered orally during the class period.
PLB 112
Plant Growth & Development
(BIS 002A,  BIS 002B,  BIS 002C);  (CHE 008B or CHE 118B);  BIS 101.
Introduction to the mechanisms and control systems that govern plant growth and development and the responses of plants to the environment. Strong emphasis on vegetative development of flowering plants.
PLB 112D
Problems in Plant Growth & Development
PLB 112 (can be concurrent);  PLB 112 required concurrently.
Discussion of problems and applications relating to principles presented in PLB 112. Students will be assigned problems each week showing novel applications of the principles described in PLB 112 and will prepare answers to be delivered orally during class period.
PLB 113
Molecular & Cellular Biology of Plants
(BIS 002A,  BIS 002B,  BIS 002C);  BIS 101.
Molecular and cellular aspects of the growth and development of plants and their response to biological and environmental stresses. Primary focus on processes unique to plants. Experimental approaches will be emphasized.
PLB 113D
Problems in Molecular & Cellular Biology of Plants
PLB 113 (can be concurrent);  PLB 113 required concurrently.
Discussion of topics and applications related to principles presented in PLB 113. Assigned topics each week show novel applications of the principles described in PLB 113; discussion of topics during class period.
PLB 116
Plant Morphology & Evolution
Introductory Plant Biology (e.g., BIS 002C, PLS 002).
Introduction to the form, development and evolution of vascular plants. Emphasis given to the form and development of reproductive structures in ferns and seed-producing plants as a basis for determining evolutionary relationships.
PLB 117
Plant Ecology
(BIS 001A,  BIS 001B,  BIS 001C) or (BIS 002A,  BIS 002B,  BIS 002C);  PLB 111 recommended.
The study of the interactions between plants, plant populations or vegetation types and their physical and biological environment. Special emphasis on California. Four full-day field trips and brief write-up of class project required.
PLB 119
Population Biology of Invasive Plants & Weeds
(BIS 001A,  BIS 001B,  BIS 001C) or (BIS 002A,  BIS 002B,  BIS 002C);  Introductory statistics recommended.
Origin and evolution of invasive plant species and weeds, reproduction and dispersal, seed ecology, modeling of population dynamics, interactions between invasive species, native species, and crops, biological control. Laboratories emphasize design of competition experiments and identification of weedy species.
PLB 123
Plant-Virus-Vector Interaction
BIS 002A;  BIS 101;  PLB 105, PLP 120, and ENT 100 recommended.
Analysis of interactions necessary for viruses to infect plants.Interactions among insect vectors and host plants involved in the plant-virus life cycle. Evolutionary aspects of the molecular components in viral infection and modern approaches to the interdiction of viral movement.
PLB 126
Plant Biochemistry
BIS 103 or BIS 105.
The biochemistry of important plant processes and metabolic pathways. Discussion of methods used to understand plant processes, including use of transgenic plants.
PLB 143
Evolution of Crop Plants
PLS 002 or BIS 001C or BIS 002C.
Origins of crops and agriculture, including main methodological approaches, centers of crop biodiversity, dispersal of crops, genetic and physiological differences between crops and their wild progenitors, agriculture practiced by other organisms, and role and ownership of crop biodiversity.
PLB 148
Introductory Mycology
BIS 001A;  BIS 001B;  BIS 001C.Limited enrollment.
Systematics, ecology, evolution, and morphology of fungi. Importance of fungi to humans.
PLB 148
Introductory Mycology
BIS 002A;  BIS 002B;  BIS 002C.Limited enrollment.
Systematics, ecology, evolution, and morphology of fungi. Importance of fungi to humans.
PLB 189
Experiments in Plant Biology: Design & Execution
(BIS 001A,  BIS 001B,  BIS 001C) or (BIS 002A,  BIS 002B,  BIS 002C);  and Consent of Instructor.  Or the equivalent courses in Plant Sciences.
Provides an opportunity for undergraduate students to formulate experimental approaches to current questions in plant biology and to carry out their proposed experiments.
PLB 190C
Research Conference in Plant Biology
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing in Plant Biology or related discipline.
Introduction to research methods in plant biology. Design of field or laboratory research projects, survey of appropriate literature, and discussion of research by faculty and students.   
PLB 192
Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of 84 units.
Technical and/or professional experience on or off campus.  Supervised by a member of the Plant Biology Department faculty.
PLB 194H
Special Study for Honors Students
Consent of Instructor.  Open only to majors of senior standing on honors list.
Independent study of selected topics under the direction of a member or members of the staff. Completion will involve the writing of a seniorthesis.
PLB 197T
Tutoring in Plant Biology
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Assisting the instructor by tutoring students in one of the Department's regular courses.
PLB 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

PLB 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

PLB 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Practical experience in acting as teaching assistant in Plant Biology courses.  Learning activity: hands on experience in preparing for and conducting discussions, guiding student laboratory work, and the formulation of questions and topics for examinations.
PLP 040
Edible Mushroom Cultivation
BIS 010 or MIC 020 recommended.
Principles and practices of growing edible mushrooms, including culture maintenance, basic mushroom substrate preparation, composting, spawn generation techniques, inoculation methods, harvesting, and pests and pest management.
PLP 120
Introduction to Plant Pathology
BIS 002C;  or Consent of Instructor.  MIC 102 recommended.
The nature, cause, and control of plant diseases.
PLP 123
Plant-Virus-Vector Interaction
BIS 002A;  BIS 101;  PLB 105, PLP 120, and ENT 100 recommended.
Analysis of interactions necessary for viruses to infect plants.Interactions among insect vectors and host plants involved in the plant-virus life cycle. Evolutionary aspects of the molecular components in viral infection and modern approaches to the interdiction of viral movement.
PLP 130
Fungal Biotechnology & Biochemistry
PLB 119;  BIS 103.
How fundamental physiological and biochemical activities of fungi impact the destructive and beneficial roles of these organisms in nature. Utilization and manipulation of fungi for biotechnological and industrial applications.
PLP 135
Field Identification of Mushrooms
Introductory course in Biological Sciences; course in mycology recommended.
Collection and identification of mushrooms and other fleshy fungi based on macro and microscopic features.
PLP 140
Agricultural Biotechnology & Public Policy
High school level biology, including genetics; BIS 010 is recommended.
Examination of the development and deployment of agricultural biotechnologies, particularly transgenic crop plants, microorganisms and animals, with consideration of conventional agriculture, public perceptions of technologies, food safety, environmental impact, public policies and regulations.
PLP 148
Introductory Mycology
BIS 001A;  BIS 001B;  BIS 001C.Limited enrollment.
Systematics, ecology, evolution, and morphology of fungi. Importance of fungi to humans.
PLP 148
Introductory Mycology
BIS 002A;  BIS 002B;  BIS 002C.Limited enrollment.
Systematics, ecology, evolution, and morphology of fungi. Importance of fungi to humans.
PLP 150
Fungal Ecology
BIS 002C;  Or equivalent.
Ecological roles of fungi as saprobes, mutualists and parasites in native and managed ecosystems. Physiological and reproductive strategies associated with adaptations to diverse habitats.
PLP 185
Advanced Mushroom Taxonomy
(PLP 135 or PLP 148);  BIS 101;  Or the equivalent to BIS 101.Limited to 12 students.
Microscopic and molecular methods used in the identification of mushroom species; molecular characterization including PCR-amplification of ribosomal nuclear DNA, digestion of the product with restriction enzymes, and DNA sequencing; a one-day field trip is required. 
PLP 192
Internship
PLP 120;  and Consent of Instructor.
Work experience off and on campus, supervised by a member of the faculty.
PLP 201A
Impacts, Mechanisms & Control of Plant Disease
PLP 120;  Graduate student status in the Plant Pathology Graduate Program or consent of instructor.
Case-studies approach to analysis of plant diseases caused by bacteria, fungi, oomycetes, and viruses, including impacts, etiology, pathogen taxonomy and epidemiology, biochemical and genetic aspects of pathogen-host interactions, virulence and resistance, and approaches to disease control.
PLP 201B
Impacts, Mechanisms & Control of Plant Disease
PLP 120;  PLP 201A;  Graduate student status in the Plant Pathology Graduate Program or consent of instructor.
Case-studies approach to analysis of plant diseases, including emerging diseases, caused by bacteria, fungi, nematodes, and oomycetes: impacts, etiology, pathogen taxonomy, epidemiology, biochemical and genetic aspects of pathogen-host interactions, virulence, resistance, disease control and statistical analysis.
PLP 205A
Diseases of Vegetable & Field Crops
PLP 120.
Clinical study of diseases of vegetable and field crops with emphasis on etiology, epidemiology, diagnosis, and control. Field trips required.
PLP 205B
Diseases of Vegetable & Field Crops; Summer Field Trip
PLP 120;  PLP 205A.
Continuation of PLP 205A. Four-day field trip investigating diseases of vegetable and field crops.
PLP 206A
Diseases of Fruit, Nut, & Vine Crop
PLP 120;  PLB 119;  and Consent of Instructor.
Clinical study of fruit, nut, and vine crops diseases with emphasis on etiology, epidemiology, diagnosis, and control. PLP 205 may be taken concurrently.
PLP 206B
Diseases of Fruit, Nut, & Vine Crop
PLP 120;  PLB 119;  and Consent of Instructor.
Clinical study of fruit, nut, and vine crops diseases with emphasis on etiology, epidemiology, diagnosis, and control. PLP 205 may be taken concurrently.
PLP 210
Biochemistry & Molecular Biology of Plant-Microbe Interaction
BIS 101;  BIS 102;  BIS 103;  BIS 104;  Or the equivalent.
Discussion of plantmicrobe interactions, focused on the underlying cellular, biochemical, and molecular events that determine the diseased state.
PLP 217
Molecular Genetics of Fungi
BIS 101;  BIS 103;  MCB 161;  PLB 119;  PLP 130;  PLP 215X;  Graduate standing in a Biological Science; MIC 215 recommended.
Advanced treatment of molecular biology and genetics of filamentous fungi and yeasts, including gene structure, organization and regulation;plant pathogenesis; secretion; control of reproduction; reproduction; molecular evolution; transformation; and gene manipulation.
PLP 224
Advanced Mycology
(PLP 148 or PLB 148);  PLP 120;  or Consent of Instructor.
Physiology, cell biology and biochemistry of fungi. Topics include mycotoxins, epidemiology and nature of emerging and re-emerging fungal diseases, fungicides, and fungicide resistance.
PLP 228
Plant Bacteriology
PLP 120;  or equivalent or consent of instructor.
Study of plant pathogenic microorganisms including taxonomy, biology, molecular mechanisms of disease, and plant disease management.  Topics include quorum sensing, rhizosphere biology, genomics, virulence factors, and host plant resistance genes.
PLP 230
Plant Virology
Upper division or graduate course in Molecular Biology or graduate student in Plant Pathology.
Viruses as causal agents of plant disease and as tools for manipulating plants; structures of virus particles; mechanisms of transmission, replication, and spread in the plant; cytology and molecular biology in susceptible and resistant reactions to virus infection; virus disease control.
PLP 290C
Advanced Research Conference
PLP 120;  or Consent of Instructor.
Presentation, evaluation, and critical discussions of research activities in the area of advanced plant pathology; primarily designed for graduate students.
PLP 291
Seminar in Molecular Plant Pathology 
PLP 120;  or Consent of Instructor.
Review and evaluation of current literature and research in biochemistry and molecular biology of plant microbe interactions.
PLS 002
Botany & Physiology of Cultivated Plants
High school course in biology and chemistry recommended.
Holistic introduction to the underlying botanical and physiological principles of cultivated plants and their response to the environment. Includes concepts behind plant selection, cultivation, and utilization. Laboratories include discussion and interactive demonstrations.
PLS 005
Plants for Garden, Orchard & Landscape
For non-majors.
Hands-on experience with plants cultivated for food, environmental enhancement and personal satisfaction. Topics include establishing a vegetable garden, pruning and propagation activities, growing flowers and ornamental plants, and the role of plants in human health and well-being.
PLS 006
Flower Power; Art & Science of Flowers & Their Uses
High school biology.
Introduction to the art and science of using and growing flowers to harness the power that is represented by their aesthetic beauty.  Handling, production, arranging, breeding and marketing of flowers. Emphasis on potted plants and cut-flowers.
PLS 012
Plants & Society
High school biology.
Dependence of human societies on plant and plant products. Plants as resources for food, fiber, health, enjoyment and environmental services. Sustainable uses of plants for food production, raw materials, bioenergy, and environmental conservation. Global population growth and future food supplies.
PLS 021
Application of Computers in Technology
High school algebra.Not open for students who have completed PLS 021V or AMR 021. (Former AMR 021.)
Concepts of computing and applications using personal computers, spreadsheets, database management, word processing and communications.
PLS 021V
Application of Computers in Technology
High school algebra.Not open for students who have taken PLS 021. 
Concepts of computing and applications using personal computers, spreadsheets, database management, word processing and communications. 
PLS 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.  Primarily for lower division students.

PLS 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.  Primarily for lower division students.

PLS 100A
Metabolic Processes of Cultivated Plants
PLS 002 or BIS 002C;  or Consent of Instructor.
Principles of energy capture and photosynthesis, water use, and nutrient cycling. Conversion of these resources into products (carbohydrates, proteins, lipids, and other chemicals) by plants. Emphasis on the relationships between environmental resources, plant metabolism and plant growth.
PLS 100AL
Metabolic Processes of Cultivated Plants Laboratory
PLS 100A (can be concurrent);  Or the equivalent.
Techniques and instruments used to study plant metabolic processes, including water relations, respiration, photosynthesis, enzyme kinetics, microscopy, immunochemistry, and nitrogen fixation. Quantitative methods, problem solving, and practical applications are emphasized.
PLS 100B
Growth & Yield of Cultivated Plants
PLS 100A;  Or the equivalent of PLS 100A.
Principles of the cellular mechanisms and hormonal regulation underlying plant growth, development, and reproduction. Emphasis on how these processes contribute to the harvestable yield of cultivated plants and can be managed to increase crop productivity and quality.
PLS 100BL
Growth & Yield of Cultivated Plants Laboratory
PLS 100B (can be concurrent);  Or equivalent.
Laboratory exercises in plant growth and development and their regulation, including photomorphogenesis, plant growth regulators, plant anatomy, seed germination, fruit ripening and senescence. Includes field trips to illustrate relationships to cropping and marketing systems.
PLS 100C
Environmental Interactions of Cultivated Plants
PLS 100A;  Or the equivalent of PLS 100A.
Principles of plant interactions with their physical and biological environments and their acquisition of the resources needed for growth and reproduction. Emphasis on how management practices and environmental conditions affect crop productivity.
PLS 100CL
Environmental Interactions of Cultivated Plants Laboratory
PLS 100C (can be concurrent).
Techniques and instruments used to study plant interactions with their physical and biological environments, including light responses, transpiration, microclimatology, nutrient availability and utilization, biomass accumulation. Quantitative methods and modeling are emphasized.
PLS 101
Agriculture & the Environment
PLS 002;  or Consent of Instructor.
Focus on the interaction between agriculture and the environment to address the principles required to analyze conflict and develop solutions to complex problems facing society.
PLS 102
California Floristics
PLS 002 or BIS 002C;  Or equivalent course in Plant Science.
Survey of the California flora, emphasizing recognition of important plant families and genera and use of taxonomic keys to identify species. Phylogenetic relationships among families. Principles of systematics and taxonomy. Two Saturday field trips.
PLS 105
Concepts in Pest Management
CHE 008B;  (PLS 002 or BIS 002B or BIS 002C).
Introduction to the ecological principles of integrated pest management, biology of different classes of pests and the types of losses they cause, population assessment, evaluation of advantages and disadvantages of different techniques used for pest management, IPM programs.
PLS 110
Crop Management Systems for Vegetable Production
PLS 002 or (BIS 002A,  BIS 002B,  BIS 002C).
Horticultural principles applied to production and management systems for vegetable crops. Laboratory and discussion illustrate efficient field management and resource use practices.
PLS 111
Principles of Agronomic Crop Production Systems
PLS 002 or (BIS 002A,  BIS 002B,  BIS 002C).
Principles, practices and technologies of agronomic cropping systems, including crop systematics, physiology, agroecology, equipment, and management. Cropping systems analysis and integration of economic and ecological decision-making considerations involved in crop production. One weekend field trip required.
PLS 112
Forage Crop Production
PLS 002 or BIS 001C or BIS 002C;  or Consent of Instructor.
Forages as a world resource in food production. Ecological principles governing the adaptation, establishment, growth and management of perennial and annual forages, including pastures, rangelands and hay; aspects of forage quality which affect feeding value to livestock.
PLS 113
Biological Applications in Fruit Tree Management
PLS 002 or BIS 001C or BIS 002C;  Or equivalent.
Physiology, growth, development and environmental requirements of fruit trees and the cultural practices used to maintain them. Emphasis on the application of biological principles in the culture of commercially important temperate zone fruit tree species.
PLS 114
Biological Applications in Fruit Production
PLS 002 or BIS 001C or BIS 002C;  PLS 113 recommended.
Reproductive biology of tree crop species.  Biological principles of fruit production, tree nutrition and orchard management for optimizing cropping.  Laboratories emphasize hands-on work with orchard tree systems that are done specifically to produce the crop.
PLS 116
Plant Morphology & Evolution
Introductory Plant Biology (e.g., BIS 002C, PLS 002).
Introduction to the form, development, and evolution of vascular plants. Emphasis given to the form and development of reproductive structures in ferns and seed-producing plants as a basis for determining evolutionary relationships.
PLS 120
Applied Statistics in Agricultural Sciences
Upper division standing.
Application of statistical methods to design and analysis of research trials for plant, animal, behavioral, nutritional, and consumer sciences.  Basic concepts and statistical methods are presented in lectures, laboratories emphasize data processing techniques, problem solving, and interpretation in specialized fields.
PLS 123
Introduction to Plant & Crop Systems Modeling
college algebra/precalculus & college physics recommended.Restricted to upper division and graduate students.
Modeling approaches commonly used in plant and crop applications. Fundamentals of how plant/crop models are developed and considerations regarding their limitations. Example model applications include degree-day and radiation-use-efficiency models of growth and yield, phenological models, and crop coefficients.
PLS 130
Rangelands: Ecology, Conservation & Restoration
PLS 002 or BIS 002B or BIS 002C;  or Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Introduction to the ecological principles and processes important for an understanding of the dynamics of range ecosystems. Emphasis on ecological and evolutionary concepts underlying management strategies for conserving biological diversity and environmental quality in rangelands.
PLS 131
Identification & Ecology of Grasses
PLS 130 or PLS 102 or PLS 147 recommended.
Taxonomy and identification of western grasses. Development of skills in using plant identification keys. Ecology and evolution of grasses in grazing ecosystems. Given the week following spring quarter.
PLS 135
Ecology & Community Structure of Grassland & Savannah Herbivores
(BIS 001A or BIS 001B);  (PLS 002 or BIS 001C);  General ecology course (ESP 100) recommended.
Feeding ecology of grassland herbivores and its importance in evolution of herbivore communities and social systems. Optimal foraging, interspecific interactions, and primary productivity are considered as factors structuring natural and managed grassland and savannah systems.
PLS 141
Ethnobotany
PLS 002 or BIS 001C or BIS 002C.
Relationships and interactions between plants and people, including human perceptions, management, and uses of plants, influences of plants on human cultures, and effects of human activity on plant ecology and evolution. Concepts, questions, methods, and ethical considerations in ethnobotanical research.
PLS 144
Trees & Forests
PLS 002 or BIS 001C or BIS 002C.
Biological structure and function of trees as organisms; understanding of forests as communities and as ecosystems; use of forests by humans; tree phenology, photosynthesis, respiration, soil processes, life histories, dormancy, forest biodiversity, and agroforestry.
PLS 147
California Plant Communities
PLS 002 or BIS 002C.
Ecology, distribution, and species of California's plant communities. Environmental forces that determine these communities, the threats they face, and their conservation and restoration opportunities.
PLS 147L
California Plant Communities Field Study
(PLS 002 or BIS 002C);  PLS 147 (can be concurrent);  Concurrent or previous enrollment in PLS 147.
Visits to many of northern California's plant communities, from the north coast to the Central Valley to the Sierras. Discussion of community ecology and hands-on identification of species. Two Saturday and two three-day field trips required.
PLS 150
Sustainability & Agroecosystem Management
SSC 010;  CHE 002A;  (PLS 002 or BIS 001C or BIS 002C).
Interdisciplinary analysis of agricultural production and food systems with primary emphasis on biophysical processes. General concepts governing the functioning of temperate and tropical agroecosystems in relation to resource availability, ecological sustainability, and socio-economic viability. Comparative ecological analyses of agroecosystems.
PLS 152
Plant Genetics
BIS 001A or BIS 002A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Basic principles of transmission genetics, cytogenetics, population and quantitative genetics, and molecular genetics.  Practical aspects of genetic crosses and analysis of segregating populations.
PLS 153
Plant, Cell, Tissue & Organ Culture
PLS 002 or BIS 001C or BIS 002C.
Basic and applied aspects of plant tissue culture including media preparation, micropropagation, organogenesis, embryogenesis, anther culture, protoplast culture and transformation.
PLS 154
Introduction to Plant Breeding
PLS 152 or BIS 101;  or Consent of Instructor.
Principles, methods and applications of plant breeding and genetics to the improvement of crop plants. Illustration of how plant breeding is a dynamic, multidisciplinary, constantly-evolving science. Laboratory emphasizes hands-on experience in the basics of breeding through experiments.
PLS 157
Physiology of Environmental Stresses in Plants
PLS 100C or PLB 111 or PLB 112 or ENH 102 or VEN 110.
Stress concepts and principles; molecular, physiological, developmental and morphological characteristics enabling plants to avoid or tolerate environmental stresses; stress acclimation and adaptation processes; responses of wild and cultivated species to drought, flooding, nutrient deficiencies, salinity, toxic ions, extreme temperatures, etc.
PLS 158
Mineral Nutrition of Plants
PLS 100A or PLB 111 or ENH 102 or VEN 110.
Evolution and scope of plant nutrition; essential elements; mechanisms of absorption and membrane transporters; translocation and allocation processes; mineral metabolism; deficiencies and toxicities; genetic variation in plant nutrition; applications to management and understanding ecological effects of nutrient availability or deficiency.
PLS 160
Agroforestry: Global & Local Perspectives
(PLS 002 or BIS 001C or BIS 002C);  (PLS 142 or PLS 150 or BIS 002B);  or general ecology course in lieu of PLS 142 or PLS 150 or BIS 002B.
Traditional and evolving use of trees in agricultural ecosystems; their multiple roles in environmental stabilization and production of food, fuel, and fiber; and socioeconomic barriers to the adoption and implementation of agroforestry practices.
PLS 162
Urban Ecology
Course in general or plant ecology such as PLB 117, ESP 100, EVE 101, EVE 120 or PLS 163.
Application of fundamental concepts and approaches in landscape and ecosystem ecology to urban ecosystems. Ecological and social drivers and responses. Landscape heterogeneity, nutrient dynamics, invasive species, altered hydrology and climate, and pollution. Discussion of primary literature.
PLS 163
Ecosystem & Landscape Ecology
Course in general, plant, or soil ecology such as EVE 117, PLB 117, ESP 100, EVE 101, or SSC 112.
Integration of concepts to understand and manage ecosystems in a complex and changing world. Emphasis on interactions among biotic, abiotic and human factors and changes over space/time. Local to global controls over water, carbon and nutrients across ecosystems/landscapes.
PLS 163
Ecosystem & Landscape Ecology
(ESP 100 C- or better) or (SSC 112 C- or better) or (EVE 117 C- or better) or (PLB 117 C- or better) or (PLS 144 C- or better) or (ESM 144 C- or better) or (PLS 162 C- or better) or (ENH 160 C- or better) or (EVE 101 C- or better);  or similar class with consent of instructor.
Integration of concepts to understand and manage ecosystems in a complex and changing world. Emphasis on interactions among biotic, abiotic & human factors and changes over space/time. Local to global controls over water, carbon and nutrients across ecosystems/landscapes.
PLS 164
Practicum in Ecological Restoration
ENH 160 recommended.
Hands-on field exposure to various aspects of ecological restoration throughout the seasonal restoration cycle with real-world practitioners. Emphasis on grassland/rangeland, riparian, and oak woodland communities.
PLS 170A
Fruit & Nut Cropping Systems
PLS 002 or BIS 002C;  or Consent of Instructor.
Overview of production and handling systems of major pomological crops, analysis of current cultural and harvesting problems and concerns associated with commercial fruit growing.
PLS 170B
Fruit & Nut Cropping Systems
PLS 002 or BIS 002C;  or Consent of Instructor.
Overview of production and handling systems of major pomological crops, including analysis of current cultural and harvesting problems and concerns associated with commercial fruit growing.
PLS 171
Principles & Practices of Plant Propagation
PLS 002 or BIS 001C or BIS 002C.
Principles and practices of propagating plants covering anatomical, physiological, and practical aspects.
PLS 172
Postharvest Physiology & Technology
General plant science background (e.g., PLS 002, PLS 012); PLS 196 recommended.
Overview of physiological processes related to maturation and senescence of plant products and their responses to postharvest stresses. Targeted approaches and technologies to maintain product quality and limit postharvest disorders. 
PLS 173
Molecular & Cellular Aspects of Postharvest Biology
PLS 002 or BIS 001C or BIS 002C;  Or equivalent.
Basic concepts and current knowledge of issues relevant to postharvest biology. Mechanisms of fruit ripening, senescence, programmed cell death. Metabolism and functions of phytohormones, carbohydrates, lipids, pigments, flavor compounds, and phytonutrients at molecular and cellular levels.
PLS 174
Microbiology & Safety of Fresh Fruits & Vegetables
PLS 002 or BIS 001C or BIS 002C;  Or equivalent.
Overview of microorganisms on fresh produce, pre- and postharvest factors influencing  risk of microbial contamination, attachment of microorganisms to produce, multiplication during postharvest handling and storage, and methods of detection. Mock outbreak trial and presentation of science-based forensic discovery.
PLS 176
Introduction to Weed Science
PLS 002 or BIS 001C or BIS 002C.
Weed biology and ecology, methods of weed management, biological control, herbicides and herbicide resistance. Weed control in managed and natural ecosystems; invasive species. Laws and regulations. Application of herbicides. Sight and software-assisted identification of common weeds.
PLS 178
Biology & Management of Aquatic Plants
(PLS 002 or BIS 001C or BIS 002C);  (CHE 008B or CHE 118B);  PLS 100C, PLB 111, ENH 102, or HYD 122 recommended.
Brief survey of common and invasive fresh water plants and macroalgae, their reproductive modes, physiology, growth (photosynthesis, nutrient utilization), development (hormonal interactions), ecology, modes and impacts of invasion, and management. Two Saturday field trips required. 
PLS 188
Undergraduate Research Proposal
Upper division standing.
Preparation and review of a scientific proposal.  Problem definition, identification of objectives, literature survey, hypothesis generation, design of experiments, data analysis planning, proposal outline and preparation.
PLS 189L
Laboratory Research in Plant Sciences
PLS 188;  and Consent of Instructor.
Formulating experimental approaches to current questions in plant science; performance of proposed experiments.
PLS 190
Seminar on Alternatives in Agriculture
Upper division standing or consent of instructor.
Seminar on topics related to alternative theories, practices and systems of agriculture and the relationship of agriculture to the environment and society. Scientific, technological, social, political and economic perspectives.
PLS 190C
Research Group Conference
Consent of Instructor.  Advanced standing.
Weekly conference on research problems, progress and techniques in the plant sciences.
PLS 192
Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of 84 units.
Work experience on or off campus in subject areas pertaining to plant and environmental sciences. Internship supervised by a faculty member.
PLS 193
Garden & Farm-Based Experiential Education Methods
Upper division standing or consent of instructor.
Methods of teaching children and youth about fruit and vegetable production and consumption. Lesson and activity planning for garden and farm field trips. Basic biology, ecology, plant science, and crop management practices. Mentorship in experiential learning. Preparation of garden site.
PLS 194H
Senior Honors Thesis
Senior standing; overall GPA of 3.250 or higher and consent of master advisor.
Independent study of selected topics under the direction of a member or members of the staff. Completion will involve the writing of a senior thesis.    
PLS 196
Postharvest Technology of Horticultural Crops
Upper division or graduate student standing.
Intensive study of postharvest considerations and current procedures and challenges in postharvest handling for fruits, nuts, vegetables, and ornamentals in California.  Scheduled first two weeks immediately following last day of spring quarter. 
PLS 197T
Tutoring in Plant Sciences
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing, completion of course being tutored or the equivalent.
Leading small voluntary discussion or lab groups affiliated with one of the department's regular courses.
PLS 205
Experimental Design & Analysis
PLS 120;  Or equivalent.
Introduction to the research process and statistical methods to plan, conduct and interpret experiments.
PLS 206
Applied Multivariate Modeling in Agricultural & Environmental Sciences
PLS 120;  (STA 106 or STA 108 or PLS 205).
Multivariate linear and nonlinear models. Model selection and parameter estimation. Analysis of manipulative and observational agroecological experiments. Discriminant, principal component, and path analyses. Logistic and biased regression. Bootstrapping. Exercises based on actual research by UC Davis students.
PLS 212
Postharvest Biology & Biotechnology of Fruits & Nuts
PLS 172.
Review of postharvest biology of fruits and nuts and biotechnological approaches to address postharvest challenges.  Morphology, biology and postharvest handling of fruits and nuts are presented along with current research, including biotechnology, and discussion of future research needs and approaches.
PLS 213
Postharvest Physiology of Vegetables
PLS 172 or PLS 100B or PLB 112.
Comparative physiology of harvest vegetables; emphasis on maturation, senescence, compositional changes, physiological disorders and effects of environmental factors. Concepts and research procedures.
PLS 220
Genomics & Biotechnology of Plant Improvement
BIS 101;  Or the equivalent.
Integration of modern biotechnology and classical plant breeding including the impact of structural, comparative and functional genomics on gene discovery, characterization and exploitation. Covers molecular markers, plant transformation, hybrid production, disease resistance, and novel output traits.
PLS 221
Genomics & Breeding of Vegetable Crops
BIS 101;  Or equivalent.
Preview of genome structure, mapping, gene tagging and development of other genetic resources applied to improvement of major vegetables. For graduate students contemplating a career in modern vegetable breeding and biotechnology.
PLS 222
Advanced Plant Breeding
PLS 154;  PLS 205;  GGG 201D or ANG 107 recommended.
Philosophy, methods, and problems in developing improved plant species. Topics include: inbreeding, heterosis, progeny testing, breeding methodology, index selection, germplasm conservation, and breeding for stress resistance. Laboratories include tours of breeding facilities and calculation and interpretation of quantitative data.
PLS 230
Forest Biology
Graduate standing or advanced undergraduate with consent of instructor.
Cross-disciplinary review of forest biology, including physiology, genetics, pathology, ecology, and silviculture.
PLS 290C
Research Conference
Consent of Instructor.

PLS 297T
Tutoring in Plant Sciences
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing; completion of course to be tutored or the equivalent.
Designed for graduate students who desire teaching experience but are not teaching assistants.
PLS 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

PMD 192
Internship in Human Pathology
Upper division standing; approval of project prior to period of internship by preceptor.
Supervised work experience in pathology and related fields.
PMD 199
Special Study in Pathology for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.  Advanced undergraduates.

PMD 290C
Research Group Conferences
Graduate level standing.
Focused around the mechanisms of function of the central nervous system under normal and pathogenic conditions. Seminars lead by various speakers from UC Davis and other Institutions, both domestic and international.
PMD 298
Advanced Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Group Study provides the opportunity for a faculty member to work with students in a focused manner.
PMD 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.

PMD 405
Brain Cutting Conference
Third- and fourth-year medical students or consent of instructor.
Current specimens are sectioned, discussed, and clinical correlations proposed.
PMD 407
Advanced Neuropathology
Consent of Instructor.  Third- or fourth-year medical student.Restricted to Medical students only.  
Presents an integrated introduction to mechanisms of the central and peripheral nervous system injury. Gain an understanding of pathological mechanisms underlying disease, the anatomic and molecular manifestations of pathologic processes of the CNS and PNS.
PMD 410B
Systemic Pathology
Approval by SOM Committee on Student progress.Restricted to Medical students only.
Anatomic and clinical pathology of organ system human disease with an emphasis on integration with clinical medicine. Topics include hematopathology and neuropathology.
PMD 410C
Systemic Pathology
Approval by SOM Committee on Student progress.Restricted to Medical students only.
Anatomic and clinical pathology of organ system human disease with an emphasis on integration with clinical medicine. Topics include pulmonary pathology, cardiovascular pathology, hematopatology, oncologic pathology, and nephropathology.
PMD 410D
Systemic Pathology
Approval by SOM Committee on Student progress.Restricted to Medical students only.
Anatomic and clinical pathology of organ system human disease with emphasis on integration with clinical medicine. Content parallels concurrent clinical courses with integration of lectures and discussions. Topics include gastrointestinal and gynecologic pathology, hepatopathology, oncologic pathology and musculoskeletal pathology.
PMD 435
Clinical Patient Care in Pathology
and Consent of Instructor.  Completed one of the following 3rd year clerkships: Family Medicine, Internal Medicine, Surgery, OBGYN or Pediatrics.
Four-week course is designed to give the third-year medical student an exposure to the diverse roles that pathologists have in clinical patient care.
PMD 440
Surgery-Pathology-Radiology (SPR) Research Laboratory 
Consent of Instructor.
Provide future clinicians and scientists with basic clinical and bioengineering laboratory skills to prepare for careers in translational research
PMD 464
Anatomic Pathology
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year medical students.Restricted to Medical Students only.
Anatomic pathology with an emphasis on autopsy and surgical pathology with application to clinical practice. Specimen grossing, frozen sections, microscopic sign-out and conferences. Exposure to cytopathology, hematopathology, and clinical pathology is available.  
PMD 465
Applied Clinical Laboratory Medicine
Consent of Instructor.
Emphasis upon laboratory techniques, procedures, and interpretation of laboratory results.  Students will be expected to participate fully and in all laboratory operations including bench techniques, laboratory management, and quality control.  
PMD 470
Sub-Specialty in Didactic Pathology
Consent of Instructor.
Externship provides in-depth exposure to one of a variety of sub-specialties in Pathology.  
PMD 474
Anatomic Pathology Acting Internship
Fourth-year medical student or consent of instructor.Restricted to medical students only.  
Anatomic Pathology AI will permit students to gain skills needed for first year Pathology Residency. Students will perform autopsies and take full responsibility for a variety of surgical pathology cases. A mix of outpatient and inpatient cases is expected.  
PMD 475
Anatomic Pathology Acting Internship
PMD 410A;  PMD 410B;  PMD 410C;  PMD 410D;  and Consent of Instructor.  Or equivalent. Successful completion of third-year clinical rotations.Restricted to Medical Students only.
Year four level course designed to provide a concentrated experience in Surgical Pathology and Cytolopathology. Rotate on the surgical and cytopathology sub-specialty teams and assume responsibility for patient cases.
PMD 493
Interdisciplinary Study of Gastrointestinal Cancer
Consent of Instructor.
In-depth study of gastrointestinal, hepatic and pancreatic cancer. Emphasis on an integration of basic science and clinical medicine. Participating departments include pathology, surgical oncology, medical oncology, gastroenterology, radiology and radiotherapy. 
PMD 497T
Tutoring in Pathology
Advanced standing or consent of instructor.
Assist instructor by tutoring medical students in preparation for one of the departmental courses that is a component of the required curriculum of the School of Medicine.
PMD 498
Advanced Group Study
Consent of Instructor.  Medical student.
Group study in variety of advanced topics in general, special, experimental, or comparative pathology.
PMD 499
Research
Medical student with consent of instructor.Limited enrollment.
Research in experimental, molecular, comparative, and applied pathology.
PMI 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

PMI 126
Fundamentals of Immunology
BIS 102;  or Consent of Instructor.  Or equivalent.
Overview of immunology including components of the immune system, initiation and regulation of the immune response, infection and immunity, hypersensitivity and immune dysfunction.  Clinical immunologic techniques, immunodeficiency, and vaccinology.
PMI 126L
Immunology Laboratory
PMI 126 (can be concurrent);  Or equivalent.
Laboratory procedures in clinical immunology. Cells of the innate and adaptive systems. Quantitative and qualitative characterization of the immune response.  
PMI 127
Medical Bacteria & Fungi
PMI 127L (can be concurrent);  Any Microbiology course with lab; Immunology strongly recommended; PMI 127L to be taken concurrently.Pass One restricted to Microbiology majors.
Introduction to the bacterial and mycotic pathogens of man and animals, with emphasis on pathogenic mechanisms and ecologic aspects of infectious disease.
PMI 127L
Medical Bacteria & Fungi Lab
PMI 127 (can be concurrent);  Any Microbiology course with lab; Immunology strongly recommended.Pass One restricted to Microbiology majors.
Introduction to the bacterial and mycotic pathogens of man and animals, with emphasis on pathogenic mechanisms and ecologic aspects of infectious disease. 
PMI 128
Biology of Animal Viruses
BIS 102.
Fundamental physical and chemical properties of animal viruses; methods of propagation, purification and assay.  Mechanisms of viral replication and pathogenesis of viral infections in man and animals. Immunity to virus diseases and oncogenic properties of animal viruses.
PMI 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

PMI 200
Research Foundations
Consent of Instructor.
Introduction to key components of graduate school success including mentor/mentee relationship issues, avoiding plagiarism, hypothesis development and experimental design, demystifying the grant writing process, understanding the NIH administrative structure, preparing for a non-academic career, and strategies to maintain a work-life balance.
PMI 203
Experimental Design & Data Analysis in Pathobiology 
Consent of Instructor.
Follows two required core courses, PMI 201 & PMI 202, for Ph.D. and M.S. students. Goal is to bridge gap between statistics and real-world pathobiology to increase students' skills and independence in experiment design and data analysis. 
PMI 206
Mentored Scientific Writing
Consent of Instructor.Enrollment limited to 12 students.
Drafting a scientific manuscript for publication based on research results. Students engage in collaborative peer review and learn effective writing, including how to convey a persuasive message and write clearly and succinctly.
PMI 214
Vector-borne Infectious Diseases: Changing Patterns
Open to graduate students, MPVM and MPH students, DVM and medical students with second- or third-year standing. Open to upper division undergraduate students with consent of instructor(s).
Vector-borne infectious diseases especially as they relate to changing patterns associated with climatic changes, trade and population movement.
PMI 221
Topics in Virus  Research
Graduate student standing (Ph.D. or M.S.).Restricted to 10 students.
Discussion-based seminar covering graduate student virology research. Informal presentations and discussion of technical problems in research design and experimentation are encouraged. Current stage of the research project is not important. 
PMI 270
Advanced Immunology
Introductory course in Immunology.Restricted to graduate student status in the Comparative Pathology Graduate Group; all other students require consent of instructor.
Current concepts of immunology with an emphasis on interactions between the host, the environment and the pathogen. These interactions will include those that are protective and successful for the host as well as those that are deleterious.
PMI 290
Seminar
Graduate level standing.
Topics in pathology, microbiology or immunology.
PMI 293A
Seminar in Infectious Diseases
Current enrollment in health science professional school or graduate standing in biological sciences.
Discussion of current topics and cases of infectious diseases.
PMI 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Group study.  
PMI 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

PMR 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.  Advanced standing.

PMR 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.  Advanced standing.

PMR 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.

PMR 405
Healthy Living: Leading by Example
Consent of Instructor.
Improve the physical and mental health of participating students while supplementing their medical education with specific concepts. 
PMR 405A
Healthy Living: Leading by Example
Consent of Instructor.
Improve the physical and mental health of participating students while supplementing their medical education with specific concepts. 
PMR 405B
Healthy Living: Leading by Example
Consent of Instructor.
Improve the physical and mental health of participating students while supplementing their medical education with specific concepts. 
PMR 440
Rehabilitation Medicine Clerkship
IMD 430;  SUR 430;  and Consent of Instructor.
Rehabilitation and comprehensive care of physically disabled and physical medicine management of neurologic, neuromuscular and musculoskeletal disorders.  Emphasis on evaluation and conservative treatment of spinal disorders, sports injuries and neuromuscular disease.  Emphasis on inpatient rehabilitation, pediatrics, spine or sports possible.  
PMR 461
Rehabilitation Medicine
IMD 430;  SUR 430;  and Consent of Instructor.
Four-week rotation designed as broad overview of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation practice for students interested in residency training in the specialty. Emphasis on evaluation and conservative treatment of spinal disorders, sports injuries, neuromuscular disease, neurological and non-operative orthopedic problems requiring rehabilitative management.
PMR 462
Rehabilitation Medicine Clinical Elective
IMD 430;  SUR 430;  and Consent of Instructor.  Completion of third-year in Medical School.
Emphasis on evaluation of patients with neurological or orthopaedic problems requiring rehabilitative techniques for their management. Introduction to management of such patients. Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation at off-campus facility must be approved by Chairperson.
PMR 470
Away Acting Internship in Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation
Consent of Instructor.
AI Externship option for PM&R rotations at other institutions. 
PMR 493
Applied Musculoskeletal Anatomy: Sports & Spine SSM
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to UC Davis School of Medicine students only.
This four-week module will review the anatomy and biomechanics of the musculoskeletal system as well as its associated pathology. The students will be instructed on appropriate musculoskeletal exam techniques and logical approach to the patient in the clinical setting. 
PMR 498
Advanced Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Study and experience for medical students in any of a number of areas in physical medicine and rehabilitation.
PMR 499
Research for Medical Students
Consent of Instructor.
Research on any of a variety of topics in physical medicine and rehabilitation.
POL 090X
Lower Division Seminar
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.Limited enrollment.
Examines fundamental issues and concepts that shape the study and practice of politics. Students will read, discuss and write about some of the most significant texts in political science in order to develop a foundation for the study of politics.
POL 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

POL 100
Local Government & Politics
POL 001 recommended.
Politics and government of local communities in the United States, including cities, counties and special districts. Emphasizes sources and varieties of community conflict, legislative and executive patterns, expertise, decision making and the politics of structure. Observation of local governing boards.
POL 102
Urban Public Policy
Consent of Instructor.  POL 001 recommended.
Political and economic relationships among central cities, suburbs, andregional, state, and federal governments. Focuses upon policy areas such as poverty, transportation, welfare, and housing, and upon who governs and who benefits from the policies in these areas.
POL 104
California State Government & Politics
Consent of Instructor.  POL 001 recommended.
California political system. Political culture, constitution, elections and parties, direct democracy, legislature, governor, executive branch, courts, finances, state-local relations and policy issues.
POL 105
The Legislative Process
POL 001 recommended.
Legislative process with emphasis on the United States Congress; legislative organization and procedures, legislative leadership and policy making, legislators and constituents, relations between Congress and other agencies.
POL 106
The Presidency
POL 001 recommended.
American presidencies origins and development; presidential power and influence as manifest in relationships with Congress, courts, parties, and the public in the formulation and administration of foreign and domestic policy; nominations, campaigns, and elections.
POL 107
Environmental Politics & Administration
POL 001 recommended.
Environment as a political issue in the United States. Development of administrative mechanisms for handling environmental problems. Changing role of Congress, the presidency, the bureaucracy and the courts in environmental policy formulation and implementation.
POL 108
Policy Making in the Public Sector
Consent of Instructor.  POL 001 recommended.
Theoretical rationale for governmental activity, program evaluation, PPBS, positive theories of policy making, the quantitative study of policy determinants, implementation, and proposals for improved decision making.
POL 109
Public Policy & the Governmental Process
POL 001 recommended.
Processes of formulating public policy, including individual and collective decision making, political exchange, competition, bargaining, coalition formation and the allocation of public goods, resources and opportunities.
POL 110
The Strategy of Politics
POL 001 recommended.
Introduction to game theory. Explanation of the behavior of individuals in strategic interaction. Rational and behavioral approaches. Applications to political science and other fields.
POL 112
Contemporary Democratic Theory
POL 004 recommended.
Major contemporary attempts to reformulate traditional democratic theory, attempts to replace traditional theory by conceptual models derived from modern social science findings.
POL 113
American Political Thought
POL 004 recommended.
Origins and nature of American political thought. Principles of American thought as they emerge from the founding period to the present.
POL 114
Quantitative Analysis of Political Data
POL 051 recommended.
Logic and methods of analyzing quantitative political data. Topics covered include central tendency, probability, correlation, and non-parametric statistics. Particular emphasis will be placed on understanding the use of statistics in political science research.
POL 115
Medieval Political Thought
POL 004 recommended.
Examination of the ideas central to medieval political thinking. Emphasis will be upon the thoughts of the major political thinkers of the period, rather than upon political history.
POL 116
Foundations of Political Thought
POL 004 recommended.
Analysis and evaluation of the seminal works of a major political philosopher or of a major problem in political philosophy.
POL 117
Topics in the History of Political Thought
POL 004 recommended.
Political thought of a specific historical period. Topics may include: Ancient Athens, the Italian Renaissance, the Enlightenment, or 19th-century Germany.
POL 118A
History of Political Theory:  Ancient
POL 004 recommended.
Critical analyses of classical and medieval political philosophers such as Plato, Aristotle, Cicero and St. Thomas.
POL 118B
History of Political Theory: Early Modern
POL 004 recommended.
Critical analysis of the works of early modern political philosophers such as Machiavelli, Montaigne, Hobbes, Locke and Hume.
POL 118C
History of Political Theory:  Late Modern
POL 004 recommended.
Critical analyses of the works of late modern political philosophers such as Rousseau, Kant, Hegel, Tocqueville, Mill, Marx and Nietzsche.
POL 119
Contemporary Political Thought
POL 004 recommended.
Contemporary political thought from the end of the 19th century to the present. Emphasis upon an individual philosopher, concept, or philosophical movement; e.g., Nietzsche, Continental political thought, Rawls and critics, theories of distributive justice, feminist theory.
POL 120
Theories of International Politics
Consent of Instructor.  POL 003 recommended.
Major contemporary approaches to the study of international politics, including balance of power, game theory, Marxist-Leninist theory, systems theory, and decision-making analysis.
POL 121
Scientific Study of War
POL 003 recommended.
Analysis of political processes involved in the initiation, conduct and termination of modern interstate warfare.
POL 122
International Law
POL 003 recommended.
Selected topics in international law; territory, sovereign immunity,responsibility, the peaceful settlement or nonsettlement of international disputes.
POL 123
The Politics of Interdependence
Consent of Instructor.  POL 003 recommended.
In the past several decades, growing economic interdependence has generated new problems in international relations. Deals with difficulties in managing complex interdependence and its implication on national policies and politics.
POL 124
The Politics of Global Inequality
POL 003 recommended.
Analysis of current economic and political international relations resulting from a long standing division of the global system into rich and poor regions. 
POL 126
Ethnic Self-Determination & International Conflict
POL 003 recommended.
Compares the claims of the state and ethnic peoples in countries undergoing internal conflicts; e.g., South Africa, Northern Ireland. Analyzes the role of the international community in facilitating the peaceful resolution of conflicts.
POL 129
Special Studies in International Politics
POL 003 recommended.
Intensive examination of one or more special problems in international politics. May be taught abroad.
POL 130
Recent U.S. Foreign Policy
Consent of Instructor.  POL 003 recommended.
Broad survey of the development of U.S. foreign policy in 20th century with emphasis on transformation of policy during and after World War II, and the introduction to analytic tools and concepts useful for understanding of current foreign policy issues.
POL 131
Analysis of U.S. Foreign Policy
Consent of Instructor.  POL 003 recommended.
Detailed presentation and examination of the formulation of execution of U.S. foreign policy. Survey of numerous factors influencing policy outcomes and how such determinants vary according to policy issue areas.
POL 132
National Security Policy
POL 003 recommended.
Development of national security policies since 1945. Analysis of deterrence and assumptions upon which it is based. Effects of nuclear weapons upon conduct of war, alliance systems, and the international system. Prospects of security and stability through arms control.
POL 134
Africa & U.S. Foreign Policy
Consent of Instructor.  POL 003 recommended.
Overview of American foreign policy toward Africa. Relationship to global adversaries. Legacies of colonialism. Challenge of national self-determination and white racism. Policies on non-alignment, producer cartels, multinational corporations, continental integration and trade and aid relations.
POL 135
International Politics of the Middle East
Consent of Instructor.  POL 003 recommended.
International politics of the Middle East as a microcosm of world politics. The Middle East as a regional system. Domestic and International Politics in the Middle East. Changing Political Structures in the Middle East. Superpower involvement in the Middle East.
POL 136
The Arab-Israeli Conflict
POL 003 recommended.
Causes, course, and implications of Arab-Israeli conflict. Competing Israeli and Arab narratives, politics of force, diplomacy. Domestic politics and A-I conflict, the superpowers and the A-I conflict, A-I conflict and world politics, potential solutions.
POL 137
International Relations in Western Europe
POL 003 recommended.
Analysis of European unity, problems of the Atlantic alliance, Atlantic political economy, East-West relations, communism in Western Europe and the relationship between domestic politics and foreign policy. May be taught abroad.
POL 139
Special Studies in Foreign Policy
Consent of Instructor.  POL 003 recommended.
Extensive examination of one or more special problems in foreign policy. 
POL 140A
Comparative Political Institutions:  Electoral Systems 
POL 002 recommended.
Workings of electoral institutions, focusing on systems used to elect presidents and assemblies, pass laws, and generally make decisions. Examples from systems throughout the world, including cases from both the advanced industrial and developing worlds.
POL 140B
Comparative Political Institutions:  Parties 
Consent of Instructor.  POL 002 recommended.
Factors shaping political parties and their role in democratic representation.
POL 140C
Comparative Political Institutions:  Legislatures
Consent of Instructor.  POL 002 recommended.
Examination of legislatures from a comparative perspective.
POL 140D
When Institutions Fail
POL 002 recommended.
Examination of factors contributing to the success and failure of political institutions.
POL 140E
Policy-Making Processes
POL 002 recommended.
Comparative analysis of policy-making in the U.S. and other countries. 
POL 142A
Comparative Development:  Political Development in Modernizing Societies
Consent of Instructor.  POL 002 recommended.
Nature and sequence of political development; its economic and social concomitants; role of elites, military, bureaucracy, and party systems; social stratification and group politics; social mobilization and political participation; instability, violence, and the politics of integration.
POL 142B
Comparative Development: Politics & Inequality 
Consent of Instructor.  POL 002 recommended.
Linkages between politics and the distribution of social and economic goods. Impact of civil rights legislation, the politics of welfare states, and the effects of political participation on the distribution of goods.
POL 142C
Comparative Political Development: Democracy & Democratization
POL 002 recommended.
Examination of conditions promoting democratization and democratic stability.
POL 143A
Latin American Politics
POL 002 recommended.
Issues related to democratic consolidation in Latin America, with a regional focus on South America. Topics include transitions to democracy, the role of the military, political economy, and political behavior.  
POL 143B
Mexican Politics
POL 002 recommended.
Introduction to the politics of contemporary Mexico. Focus on rise, fall, and aftermath of Mexico's one-party dominant system.   
POL 144A
Politics of Post-Communist Countries:  East European Politics 
POL 002 recommended.
Post-war democratization, state-building and economic reform in East European states.  
POL 144B
Politics of Post-Communist Countries:  Russia
POL 002 recommended.
Democratization, state-building and economic reform; creation of new institutions; impacts of Soviet rule.
POL 146A
Politics of Africa: Issues in Contemporary African Politics
POL 002 recommended.
African politics since the end of the Cold War. Topics include: Strategic Security Approach, Democratization, Human Rights, HIV/AIDS, African Peacekeeping, Terrorism, Religious and Ethnic Conflict, Debt and Stalled Development.
POL 146B
Politics of Africa:  Development in Africa
POL 002 recommended.
Political and economic development within Sub-Saharan Africa. States and institutions, democracy, party systems, military coups/rule, bureaucracy/corruption, race/ethnicity, national/regional integrations, trade unions, economic development strategies, class formation, and women's roles and ideology.
POL 147A
West European Politics
Consent of Instructor.  POL 002 recommended.
Evolution, politics, and contemporary problems of selected political systems of Western Europe. May be taught abroad.
POL 147B
West European Politics:  British Politics 
Consent of Instructor.  POL 002 recommended.
Evolution, politics, and contemporary problems of Britain's political system.
POL 147C
West European Politics:  French Politics
Consent of Instructor.  POL 002 recommended.
Evolution, politics and contemporary problems of France's political system.
POL 147D
West European Politics: German Politics
POL 002 recommended.
Evolution, politics and contemporary problems of Germany's political system.
POL 148A
Government & Politics of East Asia: China
POL 002 recommended.
Evolution of political institutions and political culture in China with emphasis on the post-1949 period. Primary attention to nationalism, modernization and political efficacy.
POL 148B
Government & Politics in East Asia: Japan
POL 002 recommended.
Japanese politics, with an emphasis on the postwar period. Particular emphasis on political parties, elections, political economy, and social problems.
POL 148C
Government & Politics in East Asia: Southeast Asia
POL 002 recommended.
Evolution of political institutions and economy of selected nations in Southeast Asia. Emphasis on imperialist legacy, nation building in multi-ethnic communities, and contrasts in economic performance.
POL 150
Judicial Politics & Constitutional Interpretation
POL 001 recommended.
Politics of judicial policy making, issues surrounding constitutional interpretation and decision making, prerequisite for courses on the politics of constitutional law.
POL 151
Constitutional Politics of the First Amendment & the Right to Privacy.
POL 001 recommended.
Constitutional politics surrounding such issues as the right to free expression, associational rights, the right to free exercise of religious beliefs and the right to privacy.
POL 152
The Constitutional Politics of the Equality
POL 001 recommended.
Constitutional politics of equality in the American political system; issues surrounding constitutional doctrine and judicial policymaking; special attention on racial and sexual equality.
POL 153
The Constitutional Politics of the Justice System
POL 001 recommended.
Constitutional politics of the American criminal justice system. Issues surrounding constitutional doctrine and judicial policymaking on issues such as search and seizure. Arrest, trial, incarceration and other issues of due process.
POL 154
Legal Philosophy
POL 001 recommended.
Analysis of the nature and functions of law; law as an instrument of social control and the relationship between law and morality.  
POL 155
Judicial Process & Behavior
POL 001 recommended.
Analysis of the behavior of judges and courts in the political process. Techniques of judicial decision making. Relationships among courts and other decision-making bodies.
POL 160
American Political Parties
POL 001 recommended.
Analysis of the structured operations of the party system in the United States; party functions and organizations, nomination processes, campaigns and elections, party trends and reforms.
POL 162
Elections & Voting Behavior
POL 001 recommended.
Analysis of American elections and partisan behavior; political socialization, political participation, partisanship and individual and group determinants of voting.
POL 163
Group Politics
POL 001 recommended.
Groups, institutions and individuals, especially in American politics. Historical and analytical treatment of group theories as applied to interest groups (especially labor, business, agriculture, science, military); to racial, ethnic and sectional groups; to parties, public and legislative groups, bureaucracies.
POL 164
Public Opinion
Consent of Instructor.  POL 001 recommended.
Nature of public opinion in America as it is supposed to be and as it is. Distribution of opinions among different publics and the significance of that distribution for system stability and institutions. Opinion polling and its problems.
POL 165
Mass Media & Politics
POL 001 recommended.
Organization of and decision making within the media; media audiences and the effect of the media on attitudes and behavior; the relationship of the government to the media (censorship, secrecy, freedom of the press, government regulation);the media in election campaigns.
POL 166
Women in Politics
POL 001 recommended.
Role of women in American politics. Historical experiences; contemporary organizations and strategies; areas of legislative concern; the impact of differences in social class, race, and ethnicity upon the involvement of women in politics.
POL 168
Chicano Politics
POL 001 recommended.
Political aspects of Chicano life in America; examines the Chicano's political role as it has been historically defined by different groups in society and the Chicano's responses to his/her political environment.
POL 170
Political Psychology
POL 001 recommended.
Overview to the growing literature on political psychology. Introduction to how psychological concepts (personality, attitudes, stereotypes, heuristics, affect, identity, group dynamics) help us understand how citizens think about politics.
POL 171
The Politics of Energy
POL 001 recommended.
Nature and performance of political processes for making energy choices at the international, national and state levels. Interaction of energy policy with other political goals and the ability of governmental institutions to overcome constraints on policy innovation.
POL 172
American Political Development
POL 001 recommended.
Systematic analysis of contemporary issues in American political development: historical determinants of political change; the timing and character of institutional development; conditions for successful political action. Democratization, cultural change, party formation, state-building, constitutionalism, race relations.
POL 174
Government & the Economy
POL 001 recommended.
Political basis of economic policy (taxation, spending and regulation); impact of prices, employment and growth on political demands; elite responses to economic conditions; policy alternatives and the public interest.
POL 175
Science, Technology, & Policy
Consent of Instructor.  POL 001 recommended.
Analysis of policymaking for science and the use of scientific expertise for making decisions about technology. Topics include funding of basic research, relationship of science to technological development, science and military policy, technological risks, technology assessment and scientists and politics.
POL 176
Racial Politics
POL 001 recommended.
Race, racial attitudes and racial policies in the United States with a specific emphasis on African Americans.
POL 179
Special Studies in Comparative Politics
Consent of Instructor.  POL 002 recommended.
Intensive examination of one or more special problems appropriate to comparative politics. Coverage is given to formal and informal political institutions, economically developing and developed countries, and non-democratic, democratic, and democratizing countries.
POL 180
Bureaucracy in Modern Society
Consent of Instructor.  POL 001 or POL 002 recommended.
Role of bureaucracy in a complex society, with emphasis upon changing relationships between government and the economy; consequences of rapid technological and social change for bureaucratic structures and processes; the problems of reconciling expertise and democracy and increasing the responsiveness of public bureaucracy.
POL 183
Administrative Behavior
POL 001 recommended.
Implications for American public administration of evolving concepts about behavior in organizations.
POL 187
Administrative Theory
POL 004 recommended.
Historical and critical analysis of the principal theories of organization and management of public agencies in light of such concepts as decision making, bureaucracy, authority and power, communication and control; examination of role of government bureaucracies in the total society.
POL 190
International Relations
Consent of Instructor.  POL 003 recommended.
Analysis and evaluation of substantive issues in contemporary international relations. Readings drawn from current academic and non-academic periodicals. May be taught abroad.
POL 192A
Internship in Public Affairs
Enrollment dependent on availability of intern positions with highest priority assigned to students with Political Science Public Service major; upper division standing.
Supervised internship and study in political, governmental, or related organizations.
POL 192B
Internship in Public Affairs
POL 192A;  Enrollment dependent on availability of intern positions with highest priority assigned to students with Political Science-Public Service major; upper division standing.
Supervised internship and study in political, governmental, or related organizations.
POL 193
Research in Practical Politics
POL 192A;  POL 192B;  Open only to Political Science-Public Service majors, for whom it is required.
Supervised preparation of an extensive paper relating internship experience to concepts, literature, and theory of political science.
POL 193W
Washington Center Research Seminar
POL 192W (can be concurrent);  POL 192W required concurrently.
Core academic component of Washington Program.  Topics coordinated with internships.  Research draws on resources uniquely available in Washington, DC.  Supervised preparation of extensive paper.
POL 194HA
Special Study for Honors Students
Major in Politcal Science with upper division standing and a GPA of 3.500 in the major.
Directed reading, research and writing culminating in preparation of a senior honors thesis under the direction of faculty advisor.
POL 194HB
Special Study for Honors Students
Major in Political Science with upper division standing and a GPA of 3.500 in the major.
Directed reading, research and writing culminating in preparation of a senior honors thesis under the direction of faculty advisor.
POL 195
Special Studies in American Politics
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Intensive examination of one or more special problems appropriate toAmerican politics.
POL 196A
Seminar in American Politics
Upper division Political Science majors or consent of instructor.
Intensive reading, discussion, research, writing in American politics. Topics may include Congress, the Presidency, the Supreme Court, federalism, voting behavior, interest groups, ethnic groups or other topics with a more specialized content than normal course offerings.
POL 196B
Seminar in Comparative Politics
Upper division Political Science majors or consent of instructor.
Intensive reading, discussion, research, writing in comparative politics. Topics may include one country or geographical area, political institutions or behavior across countries, political development, or other topics that are more specialized than normal course offerings.
POL 196C
Seminar in International Relations
Upper division Political Science majors or consent of instructor.
Intensive reading, discussion, research, writing in international relations including study of international political institutions (UN, EU, or NATO) or interstate relations (war, trade, immigration) and other topics with more specialized content than normal course offerings. 
POL 196D
Seminar in Political Theory
Upper division Political Science majors or consent of instructor.
Intensive reading, discussion, research, writing in political theory. Topics may include study of a single political thinker, a group of related thinkers, development of political concepts, or other topics with more specialized content than normal course offerings.
POL 196E
Seminar in Research Methods
Upper division Political Science majors or consent of instructor.
Intensive reading, discussion, research, and writing in selected topics in Research Methods such as research design, statistics, game theory, etc.
POL 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

POL 210
Research Design in Political Science
Graduate standing.
Introduction to philosophy of science and research design for political science. Topics include: logic of empirical research, overview of research design approaches for political science research.
POL 211
Research Methods in Political Science
Graduate standing.Pass One open to graduate majors; Pass Two open to graduate students.
Introductory seminar on the foundations of probability theory and mathematical statistics that are critical to empirical investigations in political science.
POL 212
Quantitative Analysis in Political Science I
POL 211.Pass One open to graduate majors; Pass Two open to graduate students.
Seminar provides an introduction to the linear regression model. Will obtain a working knowledge of basic regression techniques and problems.
POL 213
Quantitative Analysis in Political Science II
POL 211;  POL 212.Pass One open to graduate majors; pass 2 open to graduate students.
More advanced topics in the use of statistical methods, with emphasis on political applications. Topics include: properties of least squares estimates, problems in multiple regression, and advanced topics (probit analysis, simultaneous models, time-series analysis, etc.).
POL 214A
Research in Political Science
POL 213.Advanced level graduate students in the Department of Political Science only.
Research seminar sequence required of all PhD students. Design, execution, and defense of an original piece of research in political science, culminating in a paper of publishable quality.  
POL 214B
Research in Political Science
POL 212;  POL 214A.Advanced level graduate students in the Department of Political Science only.
Research seminar sequence required of all PhD students. Design, execution, and defense of an original piece of research in political science, culminating in a paper of publishable quality.  
POL 215
Introduction to Modeling Political Behavior
POL 211;  POL 212.Pass One open to graduate majors; pass 2 open to graduate students.
Introduction to formal and game theoretic analyses of politics. Students will learn basic game theory and modeling skills. We examine the benefits of modeling, and look at examples of formal analysis in a variety of political science sub-fields.
POL 220
Seminar in Political Theory
Graduate standing.Open to graduate students only.
Introduction to political theory and current debates over its study. Readings from and textual interpretations of political theory including the Federalist Papers and major works by thinkers such as Plato, Aristotle, Machiavelli, Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, and Rawls. Other readings addressing issues of textual interpretation.
POL 241
Communist Political Systems
or Consent of Instructor.  Or the equivalent.
Systematic analysis of selected topics dealing with the political process of communist political systems.
POL 242
Seminar in Comparative Politics
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Systematic survey of theories and methods used in the study of comparative politics.
POL 246
Policymaking in Third-World Societies 
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Included in an analysis of policymaking process in Third-World countries are such topics as political resources, institutional resources, decision making, resource allocations, planning, and budgeting, implementation, and distribution of world resources.
POL 250
Policy Development & Impact in U.S. Courts
Graduate standing.
Thorough overview of the literature regarding courts as policymaking institutions of government, with emphasis on the formation and implementation of judicial policy. Differences and similarities across the judicial, congressional, and executive branch policy processes.
POL 279
Political Networks: Methods & Applications
Graduate standing.
Structure of political networks, socio-matrices and affiliation networks; general networks characteristics: density, centralization, polarization, interdependence, dyadic and triadic characteristics: structural and role equivalence; subsets of networks: cliques, blocks and bloc modeling; characteristics of individuals in networks: centrality and prestige.
POL 280
Bayesian Methods: for Social & Behavioral Sciences
POL 212;  Or equivalent to course.Pass One open to graduate majors only; Pass Two open to graduate students.
Methodology seminar introducing Bayesian quantitative methods to issues and problems in political science and other social and behavioral sciences.
POL 281
Statistical Computing Issues in Political Science
POL 213;  Or equivalent to course.Restricted to graduate standing.
Methodology seminar introducing computing issues in empirical models for political science and other social and behavioral sciences.
POL 282
Advanced Modeling of Political Behavior
POL 215;  Or equivalent to course.Restricted to graduate standing or with instructors permission.
Applications of formal theory to political science. Review of relevant contributions in other social sciences. Consideration of advanced techniques in game theory. Rational and behavioral approaches.  
POL 284
Advanced Network Analysis
POL 211;  POL 212;  POL 279.
Exponential Random Graph Models (ERGMS) of networks, game theoretic models of network formation and network dynamics, diffusion processes, shocks and network collapse, percolation, cross-network spillover processes, social and political applications of advanced network models.
POL 290A
Research in American Government & Public Policy
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to graduate students.
Special research seminar on problems and issues in the study of American government and public policy.
POL 290D
Research in Judicial Politics
Graduate standing in Political Science or consent of instructor.
Contemporary research on judicial politics, judicial institutions, jurisprudence, and judicial behavior.
POL 290G
Research in Methodology
POL 212.
Special research seminar on selected problems and issues in methods in political science.
POL 297
Internships in Political Science
Open only to persons who have internships or other positions in governmental agencies, political parties, etc.
Application and evaluation of theoretical concepts through work experience or systematic observation in public and political agencies.
POL 390
The Teaching of Political Science
Graduate student standing in Political Science.
Methods and problems of teaching political science at the undergraduatelevel.
POL 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Graduate standing.

POR 002
Elementary Portuguese
POR 001.
Continuation of POR 001 in the areas of grammar and development of all basic language skills in cultural context with special emphasis on communication.
POR 003
Elementary Portuguese
POR 002.
Continuation of POR 002 in the areas of grammar and development of all basic language skills in cultural context with special emphasis on communication.
POR 008
Elementary Portuguese Conversation
POR 003.Not open to native speakers or upper division students.
Designed to develop oral communication skills. Emphasis on increasing vocabulary, improving listening comprehension, pronunciation, accuracy and grammar control. Practice of everyday situations.
POR 021
Intermediate Portuguese
POR 003.
Review and develop the grammar, vocabulary, and composition acquired in first year Portuguese through exercises and reading of modern texts. 
POR 022
Intermediate Portuguese
POR 021.
Continuation of POR 021. Focus on more difficult grammar concepts and further composition practice. Development of all language skills through exercises and reading of modern texts.
POR 023
Portuguese Composition I
POR 022.
Development of writing skills by way of reading, discussion, and analysis of authentic materials, literary texts, and videos. Selective review of grammar. Class activities include composition, journals, letters, individual and group projects.
POR 028
Intermediate Portuguese Conversation
POR 008.
Continuation of POR 008. Designed to develop oral communication skills at a more advanced level. Practice in more complex situations.
POR 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of instructor and Department Chairperson.
Directed group study primarily for lower division students.
POR 100
Principles of Luso-Brazilian Literature & Criticism
POR 022 or POR 023;  or Consent of Instructor.
Principles of literary criticism applied to the study of fiction, poetry, and essays of major literary writers of the Luso-Brazilian world.
POR 111
Structure of Portuguese: Sounds & Words
Consent of Instructor.
Linguistic description of sound patterns of Portuguese and how those sounds can be used to form larger units, such as morphemes and words. Theoretical and practical comparisons with English and with other Romance languages.
POR 130
Survey of Luso-Brazilian Literature: 1500-1800
POR 100;  (POR 022 or POR 023).
Overview of Luso-Brazilian literature, covering three major literary periods: Renaissance, Baroque, and Enlightenment. Attention to the concept of imitation and nativism.
POR 132
Portuguese Literature: Medieval & Renaissance
POR 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Overview of the origins of the Portuguese literature, spanning from the 13th century to the 16th century. Studies of lyrical and epic poetry, drama, and travel narratives.
POR 134
Luis de Cames
POR 100;  (POR 022 or POR 031).
Overview of the greatest Renaissance Portuguese poet, Luis de Cames.  Study his famous epic poem, Os Lusiadas, and a series of sonnets written by him.
POR 141
Introduction to Luso-Brazilian Culture
POR 023 or POR 022.
Introduction to history, geography, and culture of Portugal and Brazil. Art, history of ideas, and everyday cultural manifestations. Introduction to critical reading and textual analysis. Taught in Portuguese.
POR 159
Special Topics in Luso-Brazilian Literature & Culture
POR 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in the study of Luso-Brazilian literature and culture.
POR 161
Luso-Brazilian Literature & Culture 
POR 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Colonial Brazilian literature survey. Readings include 16th-18th centuries manuscripts and books of cultural importance in a society dominated by censorship and with no printing presses. Study of the role literary Academies played in the so called "culture of manuscripts." 
POR 162
Introduction  to Brazilian Literature
POR 003;  (POR 031 or POR 031G).
Narrative and poetic texts of the 19th and 20th centuries in Brazil. In-depth and comparative study of Romantic and (Neo)Naturalist movements as a forum for discussion about literary tradition and modernity in Latin America.
POR 163
20th C Masters in Brazilian Literature
POR 100;  or Consent of Instructor.
Overview of modern Brazilian literature from early 20th C to the poetry by Joo Cabral de Melo Neto and the Concretists (1960s), including European avant-garde movements and literary and cultural manifestos leading to a revolutionary body of literature.
POR 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of instructor and Department Chairperson.

PSC 020
Freshman Psychology Seminar
Freshman standing.
Instructor will acquaint students with his or her program of research, the development of scientific questions from the literature, and the application of research methods to examine these questions. Criticalthinking will be encouraged via expository writing and brief presentations.
PSC 041
Research Methods in Psychology
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  PSC 012Y, STA 013, or STA 100 strongly recommended.
Introduction to experimental design, interviews, questionnaires, field and observational methods, reliability, and statistical inference.
PSC 051
Relationship Science: Lust, Love, & Evolution
PSC 001 or PSC 001Y;  or introductory social science course or introductory life science course.
Evolutionary perspectives on attraction and close relationships. Integrating social psychological and evolutionary theories with empirical evidence pertaining to human mating.
PSC 061
Mindreading: Understanding Other Minds
PSC 001;  (SOC 001 or PHI 010).
Psychological perspectives on the process of understanding other peoples minds. Integration of social-cognitive theories with empirical evidence to explore the human ability to make sense of others' thoughts, feelings, and behaviors.
PSC 090X
Lower Division Seminar
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.Limited enrollment.
Examination of a special topic in Psychology through shared readings, discussions, written assignments, or special activities such as fieldwork or laboratory work. 
PSC 100
Introduction to Cognitive Psychology
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  PSC 041.
Introduction to human information processing, mental representation and transformation, imagery, attention, memory, language processing, concept formation, problem solving, and computer simulation.
PSC 100Y
Introduction to Cognitive Psychology
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  PSC 041.
Introduction to human information processing, mental representation and transformation, imagery, attention, memory, language processing, concept formation, problem solving, and computer simulation. 
PSC 101
Introduction to Biological Psychology
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  PSC 041.Pass One open to majors.
Survey and integration of the relationships between behavior and biological processes, including physiology, genes, development, ecology, and evolution.
PSC 103A
Statistical Analysis of Psychological Data
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  PSC 041;  (STA 013 or STA 013Y or STA 102).Pass One open to Psychology Majors.
Design and statistical analysis of psychological investigations and the interpretation of quantitative data in psychology.
PSC 103B
Statistical Analysis of Psychological Data
PSC 103A;  (STA 013 or STA 013Y or STA 102).Pass One open to Psychology majors.
Probability theory, sampling distributions, statistical inference, and hypothesis testing using standard parametric and correlational approaches. Simple regression analysis, multiple regression analysis, non-parametric statistics, introduction to multivariate statistics, with applications in psychology.
PSC 104
Applied Psychometrics: An Introduction to Measurement Theory
PSC 041;  PSC 103A;  (STA 013 or STA 013Y);  Upper division standing in Psychology.
Examination of the basic principles and applications of classical and modern test theory. Topics include test construction, reliability theory, validity theory, factor analysis and latent trait theory.
PSC 107
Questionnaire & Survey Research Methods
PSC 001 or PSC 001Y;  and Consent of Instructor.  PSC 041 or an equivalent course on social or behavioral research methods or consent of instructor.Limited enrollment.
Introduction to survey and questionnaire research methods with emphasis on how to ask questions. Social and psychological factors that influence survey response. Practical aspects of fielding survey and questionnaire research.
PSC 113
Developmental Psychobiology 
PSC 101.
The biology of behavioral development; survey and integration of the organismic and environmental processes that regulate the development of behavior.
PSC 120
Agent-Based Modeling
PSC 100 and/or PSC 101 recommended.Limited to 24 students.
Introduction to agent-based computer simulation and analysis with emphasis on learning how to model animals, including humans, to achieve insight into social and group behavior.
PSC 121
Physiological Psychology
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  PSC 041;  PSC 101.Pass One open to Psychology majors.
Relationship of brain structure and function to behavior, motivation, emotion, language, and learning in humans and other animals. An introduction to the methodology of physiological psychology and neuroscience. 
PSC 122
Advanced Animal Behavior
PSC 101 or NPB 102.Pass One  open to Psychology majors.
Advanced integrative survey of biological principles of behavioral organization, emphasizing historical roots, current research directions, conceptual issues and controversies. Laboratory exercises on the description and analysis of the behavior of captive and free-living animals 
PSC 123
Hormones & Behavior
NPB 101;  (PSC 101 or NPB 102).Pass One open to Psychology majors.
Endocrine physiology with an emphasis on the principles of behavior. Fundamental relationships between hormones and various behaviors engaged in by the organism during its lifetime. Role of hormones in behavioral homeostasis, social behavior, reproductive behavior, parental behavior, adaptation to stress. 
PSC 124
Comparative Neuroanatomy
NPB 100 or NPB 101 or NPB 110B or PSC 121.
Overview of the neuroanatomy in mammalian vertebrates, focusing on the cerebral cortex and experimental techniques. Examine changes or modifications to neural structures as a result of morphological or behavioral specializations.
PSC 124L
Comparative Neuroanatomy Laboratory
PSC 124 (can be concurrent).Pass One restricted to PSC and NPB majors; must be concurrently enrolled in PSC 124. 
Comparative neuroanatomy laboratory illustrating modern neuroanatomical techniques in determining neural connections within the mammalian brain. Includes experimentation and presentation of results.
PSC 125
Behavioral Epigenetics
PSC 101.
Review of basic principles in genetics and epigenetics with emphasis on behavior. Introduction to the use of modern molecular methods in understanding the complex relationships between genes, environment, and behavior. 
PSC 126
Health Psychology
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  PSC 041;  PSC 101 recommended.Pass One open to Psychology majors.
Psychological factors influencing health and illness. Topics include stress and coping, personality and health, symptom perception and reporting, heart disease, cancer, compliance, and health maintenance and promotion. 
PSC 130
Human Learning & Memory  
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  PSC 041;  (PSC 012Y or STA 013 or STA 100);  or Consent of Instructor.
Consideration of major theories of human learning and memory with critical examination of relevant experimental data.
PSC 131
Perception
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  PSC 041;  (PSC 100 or PSC 135).
Cognitive organizations related to measurable physical energy changes mediated through sensory channels. Perception of objects, space, motion, events.
PSC 132
Language & Cognition
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  PSC 041;  (PSC 100 or PSC 135);  or Consent of Instructor.
Introduction to the cognitive processes involved in language comprehension and production. Topics include the biological foundations of language, speech perception, word recognition, syntax, reading ability, and pragmatics.
PSC 133
Neuroeconomics/Reinforcement Learning & Decision Making
(PSC 100 or PSC 100Y or PSC 135 or ARE 100A or ECN 100A or NPB 162 or NPB 163);  (STA 013 or STA 013Y or STA 100 or PSC 103A);  or Consent of Instructor.
Theoretical and empirical approaches to neuroeconomics (neuroscience of decision making) from psychology, neuroscience, economics, and computer science. Neuroscience of judgment and decision making, behavioral economics, and reinforcement learning.
PSC 135
Cognitive Neuroscience: The Biological Foundations of the Mind
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  PSC 041;  or Consent of Instructor.  PSC 101 or PSC 121 recommended.
Neuroscientific foundations of higher mental processes including attention, memory, language, higher-level perceptual and motor processes, and consciousness. Emphasis on the neural mechanisms which form the substrates of human cognition and the relationship of mind to brain. May be taught abroad.
PSC 136
Psychology of Music
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  PSC 041;  (PSC 100 or PSC 135 or MUS 006C);  or Consent of Instructor.
Introduction to the mental and neural representations of musical structures and processes involved in perceiving, remembering, and performing music. Music and emotion.
PSC 137
Neurobiology of Learning & Memory
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  PSC 041;  PSC 101.
Overview of the neural basis of learning and memory focusing on modern behavioral  neuroscience research with animals. Topics include consolidation, neural plasticity, cellular competition for memory storage, and the role of neurogenesis in learning.
PSC 138
Consciousness & Cognition
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  PSC 041;  (PSC 100 or PSC 135).
Current theoretical and empirical evidence in the study of cognition and consciousness. Theories of consciousness, psychological and neural basis of conscious and unconscious processes such as attention, intentionality, and dreams.
PSC 139
Advanced Cognitive Neuroscience
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  PSC 041;  PSC 135;  or Consent of Instructor.
Advanced integrative survey of cognitive neuroscience, including perception, attention, memory, and navigation. Emphasis on reviewing literature in psychology, neuroscience, and statistics; understanding methods in cognition; and presentation skills.
PSC 140
Developmental Psychology
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  PSC 041.Pass One open to Psychology majors.
An ontogenetic account of human behavior through adolescence with emphasis on motor skills, mental abilities, motivation, and social interaction.
PSC 140Y
Developmental Psychology
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  PSC 041.Pass One open to Psychology Majors.
Ontogenetic account of human behavior through adolescence with emphasis on motor skills, mental abilities, motivation, and social interaction. 
PSC 141
Cognitive Development
PSC 140 or HDE 100A or HDE 100B.Pass One open to Psychology & Human Development majors.
Theories, methods, evidence, and debates in the field of cognitive development, such as nature/nurture, constraints on learning, and the role of plasticity. Topics include attention, memory, concepts about the physical and social world, and language.
PSC 142
Social & Personality Development
PSC 140 or HDE 100A or HDE 100B.Pass One open to Psychology and Human Development majors.
Social and personality development of children, infancy through adolescence. Topics include the development of personality, achievement motivation, self-understanding, sex-role identity, and antisocial behavior. Emphasis on the interface between biological and social factors.
PSC 143
Infant Development
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  PSC 041;  (PSC 140 or HDE 100A).
Psychological development in infancy. Topics include physical and motor development, sensory and nervous system development, and memory and cognitive development. Emphasis will be  on evaluating theories, empirical research, and experimental methods for understanding infant development.
PSC 145
Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience
PSC 135 or ((PSC 140 or HDE 100A or HDE 100B);  (PSC 101 or PSC 121 or NPB 161 or HDE 163));  PSC 141 recommended.
Neuroscientific theories and methods (EEG, ERP, fNIRS, fMRI) that inform an understanding of behavioral and cognitive development over infancy and childhood. Neurodevelopmental correlates of perception, action, language, and social cognition; value of the neuroscientific perspective; limitations and challenges of neuroscientific research in the developmental context.
PSC 146
The Development of Memory
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  PSC 041;  and any Psychology upper division course from Core Group A or D.Pass One open to Psychology majors.
Theory and research on memory development with focus on infancy and childhood. 
PSC 148
Developmental Disorders
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  PSC 041;  (PSC 140 or PSC 141 or HDE 100A or HDE 100B).
Current scientific knowledge of the influences of biological, cognitive, and environmental factors on the emergence of disorders with onset in childhood.  Examples include autism spectrum, ADD/ADHD, dyslexia and dyscalculia.  Emphasis placed on understanding these disorders, their causes and their treatments.
PSC 151
Social Psychology
PSC 001 or PSC 001Y, PSC 041 recommended.Pass One open to Psychology majors.
Behavior of the individual in the group. Examination of basic psychological processes in social situations, surveying various problems of social interaction: group tensions, norm-development, attitudes, values, public opinion, status. 
PSC 152
Social Cognition
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  PSC 041.
Examines how social factors influence how we attend to, encode, and process information and how these mental processes affect subsequent judgments and behavior. 
PSC 153
Psychology & Law
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  PSC 041.Pass One open to Psychology majors.
Current theoretical and empirical issues in the study of psychology and law. Topics include eyewitness testimony, child abuse, jury decision making, juvenile delinquency and criminology, prediction of violence, insanity defense, and memory for traumatic events.
PSC 154
Psychology of Emotion
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  PSC 041.Pass One open to Psychology majors.
Introduction to current theories and research on emotion and bodily feelings with special reference to self-knowledge. 
PSC 157
Stereotyping, Prejudice, & Stigma
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  PSC 041.
Social psychological underpinnings of stereotyping, prejudice, and stigma from sociocultural, motivational, and cognitive perspectives. Topics include: origins, maintenance, change, effects on person perception and memory, and the automaticity/controllability of stereotyping and prejudice.
PSC 158
Sexual Orientation & Prejudice
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  PSC 041.Pass One open to Psychology majors.
Current scientific knowledge about sexual orientation and prejudice based on sexual orientation. Emphasis is placed on learning the skills necessary for a critical understanding of science and public policy issues relevant to sexuality.
PSC 159
Gender & Human Reproduction
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  PSC 041.Pass One open to Psychology majors.
Psychology of reproduction. Reproductive events over the course of an individuals life, including sexual development, mate choice, relationships, and reproduction. Biological and social psychological explanations at the levels of mechanism and evolutionary function.
PSC 161
Psychology of the Self
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  PSC 041.
Psychological theory and research on the self. Topics include: self-knowledge, self-esteem, self-regulation, self-presentation, cognitive and emotional aspects of the self, and the role of the self in shaping social interaction. 
PSC 162
Introduction to Personality Psychology
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  PSC 041.Pass One open to Psychology majors.
Scientific study of personality. Methods of personality research. Overview of current research and theory in the field of personality psychology. May be taught abroad.
PSC 165
Introduction to Clinical Psychology 
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  PSC 041;  PSC 168;  (PSC 140 or PSC 151).
Major theoretical formulations in the history of clinical psychology, from classical psychoanalysis to contemporary existentialism and behavior modification. A survey, based on lectures, films, and tapes, of what clinical psychologists do, including methods of appraisal, professional roles,and approaches to treatment.
PSC 165
Introduction to Clinical Psychology 
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  PSC 041;  (PSC 140 or PSC 151).
Major theoretical formulations in the history of clinical psychology, from classical psychoanalysis to contemporary existentialism and behavior modification. Survey based on lectures, films, and tapes, of what clinical psychologists do, including methods of appraisal, professional roles, and approaches to treatment.
PSC 168
Abnormal Psychology 
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  PSC 041.
Descriptive and functional account of behavioral disorders, with primary consideration given to neurotic and psychotic behavior.
PSC 170
Psychology of Religion
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  PSC 041.
Major theories, issues, data, and research methodologies of the psychology of religion. Religious experience and expression; religious development in childhood, adolescence, and adulthood; conversion; religious influences on physical and mental health; cross-cultural perspectives.
PSC 175
Genius, Creativity, & Leadership
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  PSC 041;  or Consent of Instructor.  Or equivalents.
Phenomenon of genius is examined from a diversity of theoretical, methodological, and disciplinary perspectives, with an emphasis on outstanding creativity and leadership in art, music, literature, philosophy, science, war, and politics.
PSC 180A
Research in Cognitive & Perceptual Psychology 
PSC 041;  four upper division Psychology courses and consent of instructor.
Empirical research on selected topics in general experimental psychology (general research design and analysis, perception, cognition, cognitive development, etc.). Specific content will vary from quarter to quarter.
PSC 180B
Research in Psychobiology 
PSC 101;  three additional upper division Psychology courses and consent of instructor.
Empirical research on selected topics in psychobiology (animal learning, animal behavior, physiological and sensory psychology, developmental psychobiology, computer modeling of neural systems). Content varies.
PSC 180C
Research in Personality & Social Psychology 
PSC 041;  four upper division Psychology courses and consent of instructor.
Empirical research on selected topics in personality and social psychology (personality, social psychology, organizational psychology, etc.). Content will vary from quarter to quarter.
PSC 180D
Research in Developmental Psychology 
PSC 041;  Consent of Instructor.  Four upper division Psychology courses.
Empirical research on selected topics in developmental psychology (research design and analysis, development, cognitive development, social and personality development etc.). 
PSC 182
Methods in Laboratory Research
Consent of Instructor.
Training in specific lab-based research methods coupled with hands-on experience in a research lab. Students assessed on their ability report and interpret research findings. Content varies from quarter to quarter.
PSC 185
History of Psychology
(PSC 001 or PSC 001Y);  PSC 041;  Upper division standing or consent of instructor.Pass One open to Psychology majors.
Development of psychological thought and research in context of history of philosophy and science.
PSC 190
Seminar in Psychology 
Junior or senior standing; major in Psychology or consent of instructor.
Intensive treatment of a special topic or problem of psychological interest. 
PSC 190X
Upper Division Seminar
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.Limited enrollment.
In-depth examination at an upper division level of a special topic in Psychology. Emphasis on student participation in learning. May not be repeated for credit.
PSC 192
Fieldwork in Psychology
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing in Psychology.Limited enrollment.
Supervised internship off and on campus, in community and institutional settings. Maximum of 6 units may be used towards satisfaction of upper division major requirement.
PSC 194HA
Special Study for Honors Students
Consent of Instructor.  Senior standing in Psychology and qualifications for admission into college honors program; at least one course from PSC 180A, PSC 180B, PSC 180C or PSC 199 strongly recommended.
Directed research. Supervised reading, research and writing leading to submission of a Senior Honors thesis under the direction of faculty sponsor.
PSC 194HB
Special Study for Honors Students
Consent of Instructor.  Senior standing in Psychology and qualifications for admission into college honors program; at least one course from PSC 180A, PSC 180B, PSC 180C or PSC 199 strongly recommended.
Directed research. Supervised reading, research and writing leading to submission of a Senior Honors thesis under the direction of faculty sponsor.
PSC 197T
Tutoring in Psychology
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Intended for advanced undergraduate students who will lead discussion sections in Psychology courses. 
PSC 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.
PSC 200
Proseminar in Psychology
Graduate standing in Psychology or consent of instructor.
Introduces matriculating graduate students to research activities of departmental faculty.
PSC 201
Research Preceptorship
Consent of Instructor.

PSC 202
Research Seminar
Graduate standing in Psychology.
Presentation of graduate research to program faculty and graduate students.
PSC 204A
Statistical Analysis of Psychological Experiments
STA 102;  Or equivalent; graduate standing in Psychology or consent of instructor.
Probability theory, sampling distributions, statistical inference, and hypothesis testing using standard parametric and correlational approaches. Analysis of variance, factorial and repeated measures, and tests of trends.
PSC 204B
Causal Modeling of Correlational Data
PSC 204A;  Or the equivalent course and graduate standing in Psychology or consent of instructor.
Examination of how to make causal inferences from correlational data in the behavioral sciences. Emphasis is on testing rival causal models using correlations among observed variables. Beginning with multiple regression analysis, discussion advances to path analysis and related techniques.
PSC 204D
Advanced Statistical Inference from Psychological Experiments
PSC 204A;  Or the equivalent; graduate standing in Psychology or consent of instructor.
Advanced topics in statistical inference, which may include probability theory, sampling distributions, statistical inference and hypothesis testing, nonparametric statistics, Bayesian approaches, and advanced issues in analysis of variance.
PSC 205A
Applied Multivariate Analysis of Psychological Data
PSC 204A;  PSC 204B;  PSC 204D;  or Consent of Instructor.
Review of the major methods of multivariate data analysis for psychological data.  Students will program statistical routines using a linear algebra-based computing language.  Topics will include multivariate analysis of variance. discriminant analysis, canonical analysis factor analysis, and component analysis.
PSC 205B
Factor Analysis
PSC 204A;  PSC 204B;  or Consent of Instructor.  Or equivalent courses; graduate standing.
Theory and methods of factor analysis, including exploratory factor analysis, confirmatory factor analysis, and principal component analysis.
PSC 205C
Structural Equation Modeling
PSC 204A;  PSC 204B;  or Consent of Instructor.  Or equivalent courses; graduate standing.
Theory and methods of structural equation modeling, including path analysis, confirmatory factor analysis, multiple-group modeling and latent growth curve modeling.
PSC 205D
Multilevel Models
PSC 204A;  Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Introduction to statistical techniques for the analysis of normal, hierarchically structured data, such as cross-sectional clustered data or repeated-measures data.  Topics include hierarchical linear models, latent growth curve models, and how these methods handle unbalanced and/or missing data.
PSC 205E
Applied Psychometrics & Measurement Theory
PSC 204A;  Graduate standing in Psychology or consent of instructor.
Examination of the basic principles and applications of classical and modern test theory. Topics include test construction, reliability theory, validity theory, factor analysis, and latent trait theory.
PSC 205F
Item Response Theory
PSC 204A;  Or the equivalent; graduate standing in Psychology or consent of instructor.
Item response theory allows for the creation of precise measurement instruments in psychological testing. Review Classical Test Theory, and then cover basic IRT models through advanced applications.
PSC 205G
Applied Longitudinal Data Analysis
PSC 204A;  Graduate standing in Psychology or consent of instructor.
Modeling and understanding of intraindividual change and interindividual differences in change. Reviews conventional methods and introduces contemporary techniques for modeling intraindividual change. 
PSC 207
Survey & Questionnaire Research Methods
Completion of a course on social or behavioral research methods, graduate standing.
Survey and questionnaire research methods with emphasis on how to ask questions. Cognitive, motivational, and social processes that influence how respondents answer questions; sampling techniques; internet resources; practical aspects of fielding survey and questionnaire research. 
PSC 208
Physiological Psychology
Graduate standing in Psychology or consent of instructor.
A conceptual analysis of the contributions of neuroanatomy, neurophysiology and neurochemistry to an understanding of animal and human behavior.
PSC 208A
Fundamentals of Human Electrophysiology 
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to 15 students.
In-depth introduction and hands-on experience with the event-related potential (ERP) method in the study of attention, executive control, memory, language and social cognitive neuroscience. 
PSC 209A
Introduction to Programming: Matlab
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
The Matlab programming environment as a means of organizing, analyzing, and visualizing scientific data.  Basic programming concepts such as variables, loops, conditional branching, and efficient programming techniques will be emphasized.
PSC 210
Fundamentals of Cognitive Neuroimaging
Basic knowledge of inferential statistics and experimental Psychology.
Introduction to empirical foundations and methodology of neuroimaging, emphasizing pragmatics of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to study cognition. Topics include MR physics, the relationship between neural activity and the BOLD response, experimental design, and analysis of fMRI data. 
PSC 211
Advanced Topics in Neuroimaging
PSC 210;  or Consent of Instructor.Restricted to 16 students.
Critical presentation and discussion of the most influential advanced issues in neuroimaging, emphasizing fMRI design/analysis and the integration of fMRI with EEG/MEG.
PSC 212A
Developmental Psychology: Cognitive & Perceptual Development
Graduate standing or consent of instructor; completion of an undergraduate or graduate course on developmental psychology or human development.
Theories and empirical findings concerning human cognitive and perceptual development. Development of perception, memory, concepts (e.g., theory of mind, concepts about number), problem solving, and language from infancy to adolescence.
PSC 212B
Developmental Psychology: Social, Emotional, & Personality Development
Graduate standing or consent of instructor; completion of an undergraduate or graduate course on developmental psychology or human development.
Theories and empirical findings concerning human social, emotional, and personality development. Development of emotions, moral reasoning and behavior, personality, self-concept, and social cognition from infancy to adolescence (may include adulthood).
PSC 217
Behavioral Genetics
Graduate standing.Restricted to 20 students.
Review basic principles in genetics and select topics in molecular genetics with emphasis on behavior. Use of modern molecular methods to outline complex relationships between genes, environment, and behavior.  
PSC 218A
Fundamentals of Animal Behavior
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division undergraduate introduction to the biology of behavior, such as PSC 101, PSC 122, PSC 123, NPB 102, NPB 150, NPB 152, WFC 141, ENT 104, or ANS 105.
Survey of the phenomena and theory of animal behavior from the perspectives of multiple biological disciplines, including evolution, ecology, psychology, genetics, neurobiology, endocrinology, and animal science. 
PSC 218B
Fundamentals of Animal Behavior
PSC 209A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Survey of the phenomena and theory of animal behavior from the 
PSC 220
History of Psychology 
Graduate standing in Psychology or consent of instructor.
A lecture-seminar on the history of psychology and on the applicability of early psychological theory and research to contemporary investigations.
PSC 221
Academic Writing in Psychology
Consent of Instructor.
Strategies for developing and honing academic writing skills and writing productivity, with a particular focus on how to write a clear and compelling empirical journal article in psychology.
PSC 230
Cognitive Psychology
Graduate standing in Psychology or consent of instructor.
Analysis of the mental processes by which knowledge is acquired, manipulated, stored, retrieved and used.
PSC 231
Sensation & Perception
Graduate standing in Psychology or consent of instructor.
Analysis of the role of sensory processes and perception in experience and their effects on behavior.
PSC 241
Attitudes & Social Influence
Consent of Instructor.
Survey of theory and research in the field of attitudes and social influence. Topics include attitude definition and measurement, major theories of attitude formation and change, the relationship between attitudes and behavior, and recent directions and controversies.
PSC 242
Attraction & Close Relationships
Graduate standing in Psychology, Sociology, Human Development, a related social science, or consent of instructor.
Social psychological theory and research on attraction and close relationships, with a particular emphasis on romantic relationships. Covers attachment theory, interdependence theory, and evolutionary psychological perspectives.
PSC 245
Social Psychology 
Graduate standing in Psychology or consent of instructor.
Theory and research in social psychology.
PSC 247
Personality 
Graduate standing in Psychology or consent of instructor.
Theory and research in human personality.
PSC 251
Topics in Genetic Correlates of Behavior
Graduate standing in Psychology or consent of instructor.
Theory and experiment in the genetic contributions to animal and human behavior.
PSC 252
Topics in Psychobiology
Graduate standing in Psychology or consent of instructor.
Critical study in a selected area of psychobiology.
PSC 261
Cognitive Neuroscience
Graduate student standing in Psychology or Neuroscience or consent of instructor.
Graduate core course for neuroscience. Neurobiological bases of higher mental function including attention, memory, language. One of three in three-quarter sequence.
PSC 263
Topics in Cognitive Psychology
Graduate standing in Psychology or consent of instructor.
Selected topics in language processing, memory, perception, problem solving, and thinking, with an emphasis on the common underlying cognitive processes.
PSC 264
Topics in Psycholinguistics
Graduate standing in Psychology or consent of instructor.
Discussion of fundamental issues in the psychology of language.
PSC 270
Topics in Personality & Social Psychology
Graduate student standing or consent of instructor.
Critical study of a selected area of personality or social psychology.    
PSC 271A
Core Concepts & Methods in Learning, Memory, & Plasticity
Graduate Standing or Consent of Instructor.
Core concepts and methods used in studies of learning, memory and plasticity. Behavioral paradigms and measurement approaches in human and animal studies of learning and plasticity, as well as a consideration of the functional, anatomical and neuronal mechanisms underlying brain plasticity. 
PSC 271B
Core Concepts & Methods in Learning, Memory, & Plasticity
PSC 271A or NPB 271A or NSC 271A.
Core concepts and detailed survey methods used in studies of learning, memory and plasticity, from the cellular and molecular level to the level of neural circuits. Areas of learning, memory, and plasticity research where recent progress has been made in linking across these levels of analysis.
PSC 271C
Translational Approaches to Learning, Memory, & Plasticity Disorders
PSC 271B or NPB 271B or NSC 271B.
Neurological disorders, the effect of these disorders on learning, memory and plasticity, approved therapeutic options and current research designed to improve understanding and treatment of these diseases: (i) the clinical presentation, diagnostic criteria, and existing therapies, (ii) mechanistic studies in humans and animal models, and (iii) molecular pathways involved in the disease and approaches for drug discovery.
PSC 272
Topics in Developmental Psychology
Graduate standing in Psychology or consent of instructor.
Selected topics in developmental psychology, including developmental  neuroscience, memory development, infancy, cognitive development, social development, child maltreatment, children and law, perceptual development, emotional development, children at risk, and adolescence, with emphasis on developmental processes and developmental theory. 
PSC 289A
Current Research in Psychology
Graduate standing in Psychology or consent of instructor.
Contemporary theory and empirical research in specialized topics in psychology. Topics include developmental attachment, social neuroscience, mental health, emotion, sexual orientation and identity.
PSC 289B
Current Research in Psychology
PSC 289A;  Graduate standing in Psychology or consent of instructor.
Intensive examination of contemporary theory and empirical research on a specialized topic in psychology. Sample topics include developmental attachment, social neuroscience, culture and mental health, electrophysiology and cognitive neuroscience, emotion, implicit cognitive processes, sexual orientation and identity, and attention. 
PSC 290
Seminar
Graduate standing in Psychology or consent of instructor.
Seminar devoted to a highly specific research topic in any area of basic psychology. Special topic selected for a quarter will vary depending on interests of instructor and students.
PSC 299D
Dissertation Research
Consent of Instructor.

PSC 390
The Teaching of Psychology
Consent of Instructor.  Advanced graduate standing in Psychology or a closely related discipline.
Methods and techniques of teaching undergraduate psychology. Integration of learning outcomes with effective evaluation. Practical experience in the application of pedagogical principles.
PSC 390A
The Teaching of Psychology
Consent of Instructor.  Advanced graduate standing in Psychology or a closely related discipline.
Methods and problems of teaching psychology at the undergraduate and graduate levels; curriculum design and evaluation. Practical experience in the preparation and presentation of material.
PSC 390B
The Teaching of Psychology
Consent of Instructor.  Advanced graduate standing in Psychology or a closely related discipline.
Methods and problems of teaching psychology at the undergraduate and graduate levels; curriculum design and evaluation. Practical experience in the preparation and presentation of material.
PSC 391
Teaching of Psychology Practicum
PSC 390;  or Consent of Instructor.
Supervised teaching in undergraduate classrooms. Techniques for delivering content through lectures, discussions, or labs; course administration; communications; assessment of student learning; solving ethical problems; instructional technology.
PSC 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Graduate standing.

PSU 460
Clinical Plastic Surgery Elective
SUR 430;  and Consent of Instructor.  Third- or fourth-year medical students.
Total involvement in patient care involving surgical preparation, treatment, operative care, and follow-up. Developing and understanding reconstruction and aesthetic plastic surgery. Microvascular surgery included. Student rotation.
PSY 192
Willow Clinic
Consent of Instructor.  UC Davis enrollment; upper division standing.
Student run clinic for upper division students interested in learning about and meeting the unique health care needs for the homeless population.
PSY 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.  Advanced standing.

PSY 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.  Advanced standing.

PSY 298
Directed Group Study for Graduate Students
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

PSY 299
Special Study for Graduate Students
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

PSY 403
Fundamentals of Clinical Psychiatry
Approval of SOM Committee on Student Progress.Restricted to medical student only.
Psychiatric interviewing, Mental Status Exam and diagnosis. Major child and adult disorders, including substance abuse and dependence. Weekly student interviews of psychiatric patients in small group format.
PSY 410
Klingenstein Summer Elective 
Consent of Instructor.
During this "mini-clerkship," fellows will attend clinics, in-patient settings, and clinicians' offices. They will meet weekly to present cases and review current literature, and will complete a summary narrative at the end of their experience.
PSY 410L
Klingenstein Longitudinal Elective 
Consent of Instructor.
Year-long mentoring program provides clinical exposure to child and adolescent psychiatric healthcare during a medical student's pre-clinical years.  
PSY 412
Psychiatry Grand Rounds
Medical students or staff or other qualified mental health professionals with consent of instructor.
Weekly conference at UCDMC for presentation of selected clinical cases,presentation of lecture and research reports.
PSY 413
Outpatient Psychiatry Clerkship
PSY 430;  And/or consent of coordinator.
Experience in clinical management/treatment of adult outpatients with psychiatric and substance abuse disorders; crisis management/intervention, evaluation/development of diagnosis and treatment plan; emphasis on outpatient psychopharmacology/brief psychotherapy; observation of group therapy. Individual supervision by faculty/residents.
PSY 414
Psychosomatic Medicine Clerkship
Psychiatry Clerkship or consent of instructor; medical students only.
A large university hospital service in which the student functions as a member of the team in evaluation, management and psychiatric liaison with other medical specialties. Intensive supervision from senior staff and psychiatric residents. 
PSY 415
Telemedicine Clinical Elective
Fourth-year medical student with consent of instructor.
Fourth-year medical student elective in Telemedicine focusing on psychiatric issues. Align with University, School and Center for Health and Technology mission of rural outreach and public health, particularly in primary care.
PSY 416
Child Psychiatry Clerkship
PSY 430;  And/or consent of coordinator.
Didactic and clinical inpatient, outpatient, and consultation-liaison experiences with children, adolescents and families. Clinical observations, diagnostic assessment, and treatment will be undertaken with close supervision. Literature review and case conferences presented on a regular basis.
PSY 417
Jail Psychiatric Clerkship
PSY 430;  and/or consent of course coordinator.
Students gain experience, under close faculty supervision, assessingacute and chronic mentally ill inmates in both inpatient and clinic settings.
PSY 418
Off-Campus Clinical Experience
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year medical students.
Clinical or research elective in off-campus medical school or mental health setting. To be arranged with advance approval of instructor andindividual in charge of off-campus setting.
PSY 420
Acting Internship in Psychiatry
PSY 430;  and/or consent of course coordinator.
Acting intern position with close faculty supervision with emphasis on biological psychiatry, psychopharmacology and psychodynamic aspects appropriate to diagnostic and long-term patient management.
PSY 421
Combined Internal Medicine-Psychiatry Clerkship
Psychiatry Clerkship or consent of instructor; medical students only.
Students rotate through the county Primary Care Clinic under the supervision of dual-boarded Psychiatry and Internal Medicine Faculty to provide medical care of indigent and uninsured patients as well as primary care for psychiatry patients.
PSY 423
Willow Clinic
Open to medical students in all four years of medical school.
Student run clinic for medical students interested in learning about and meeting the unique health care needs for the homeless population.
PSY 424
Functional Genomics 
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
The theory, methods and principles of functional neurogenomics withemphasis on the relationship to molecular mechanisms involved in development and disease of the nervous system.
PSY 430
Psychiatry Clinical Clerkship
Approval by School of Medicine Committee on Student Progress.
Assigned to clinical settings, students build upon the skills gained in preclinical years; emphasis on diagnostic, therapeutic and interpersonal skills. Areas of focus - patient management, interviewing skills, mental status exam, differential diagnosis, basic psychopharmacology, crisis assessment, intervention and case
PSY 430FA
SJVP Longitudinal Psychiatry Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.  Approval by School of Medicine Committee on Student Progress.
Longitudinal Clerkship runs concurrently with Family Medicine, Pediatrics and Internal Medicine for 32 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. 
PSY 430FB
SJVP Longitudinal Psychiatry Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.  Approval by School of Medicine Committee on Student Progress.
Longitudinal Clerkship runs concurrently with Family Medicine, Pediatrics and Internal Medicine for 32 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. 
PSY 430FC
SJVP Longitudinal Psychiatry Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.  Approval by School of Medicine Committee on Student Progress.
Longitudinal Clerkship runs concurrently with Family Medicine, Pediatrics and Internal Medicine for 32 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. 
PSY 430FD
SJVP Longitudinal Psychiatry Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.  Approval by School of Medicine Committee on Student Progress.
Longitudinal Clerkship runs concurrently with Family Medicine, Pediatrics and Internal Medicine for 32 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. 
PSY 430RA
Rural PRIME Psychiatry Longitudinal Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.
Psychiatry Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
PSY 430RB
Rural PRIME Psychiatry Longitudinal Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.
Psychiatry Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
PSY 430RC
Rural PRIME Psychiatry Longitudinal Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.
Psychiatry Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
PSY 430RD
Rural PRIME Psychiatry Longitudinal Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.
Psychiatry Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
PSY 430TA
TeachMS Longitudinal Psychiatry Clerkship (A)
Consent of Instructor.  Approval by School of Medicine Committee on Student Promotions.
Longitudinal Clerkship runs concurrently with Primary Care and Medicine for 24 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. On-going patient write-ups, rounds, conferences are required.
PSY 430TB
TeachMS Longitudinal Psychiatry Clerkship (B)
Consent of Instructor.  Approval by School of Medicine Committee on Student Promotions.
Longitudinal Clerkship runs concurrently with Primary Care and Medicine for 24 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. On-going patient write-ups, rounds, conferences are required.
PSY 430TC
TeachMS Longitudinal Psychiatry Clerkship (C)
Consent of Instructor.  Approval by School of Medicine Committee on Student Promotions.
Longitudinal Clerkship runs concurrently with Primary Care and Medicine for 24 weeks. Time is spent in direct patient care situations under the guidance of faculty. On-going patient write-ups, rounds, conferences are required.
PSY 439D
Directed Clinical Studies in Psychiatry
Consent of Instructor.
Individual directed studies in extended preparation for modified curriculum or to complete a clinical rotation following a leave of absence.
PSY 439R
Directed Studies in Psychiatry
Consent of Instructor.
Individual directed studies in extended preparation for remediation of all or part of clinical rotation. Clinical studies to accommodate and satisfy remedial work as directed by the Committee on Student Progress and approved by the course IOR.
PSY 480
Insights in Psychiatry
Consent of Instructor.  First- or second-year medical student in good academic standing.
On individual basis, student provided with an opportunity for gaininginsight into various clinical activities in the practice of psychiatry.
PSY 488
Acting Internship in Inpatient Psychiatry, Away Rotation
Psychiatry Clerkship and/or consent of course coordinator.
Inpatient acting internship at approved non-UCDHS affiliated training program that provides experience and preparation for ambulatory medical care.  Students perform as an intern, with a smaller number of patients, greater supervision, and responsibility for the ongoing care of assigned patients.
PSY 489
Acting Internship in Ambulatory Psychiatry, Away Rotation 
Psychiatry Clerkship and/or consent of course coordinator.
Outpatient acting internship at an approved non-UCDHS affiliated training program that provides experience and preparation for ambulatory medical care. Students perform as an intern, with smaller number of patients, greater supervision, and responsibility for the ongoing care of assigned patients. 
PSY 493
Culture, Medicine & Society
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to UC Davis School of Medicine students only.
Learn about the epidemiological significance of health disparities and barriers to access to health care. Covers: (1) Epidemiology/Health Disparities; (2) Society & Medicine; (3) Cinemeducation; (4) Reflection/Integration.
PSY 498
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Approved for graduate degree credit. Medical students desiring to explore particular topics in depth.
PSY 499
Research
Consent of Instructor.
Approved for graduate degree credit. Individual research on selected topics or research projects.
PTX 201
Principles of Pharmacology & Toxicology I
BIS 102;  NPB 101.
First of three courses presenting fundamental principles of pharmacology and toxicology. Introductory overview of basic concepts in pharmacology/toxicology, followed by in-depth blocks on fate processes of chemicals in the body, fate processes in tissue selective responses, selective toxicity employed therapeutically.
PTX 202
Principles of Pharmacology & Toxicology II
PTX 201.
Second of three courses presenting fundamental principles of pharmacology and toxicology. Principles of pharmacodynamics and mechanisms of drug/toxicant actions.
PTX 203
Principles of Pharmacology & Toxicology III
PTX 201;  PTX 202.
Integrated physiological systems, cardiovascular and nervous systems and how drugs and toxicants act to perturb function.
PTX 230
Advanced Topics in Pharmacology & Toxicology
PTX 201;  and Consent of Instructor.
In-depth coverage of selected topics for graduate students in Pharmacology-Toxicology and related disciplines. Topics determined by instructor in charge for each quarter.
PTX 277
Molecular Mechanisms in Cancer & other Diseases
MCB 121 or MCB 122;  Undergraduate or graduate introductory course in cell biology (such as BIS 104), and general biochemistry (MCB 121 or MCB 122) required; PTX 202 recommended.Restricted to graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Exploration of cutting edge investigations on the underlying mechanisms of cancer biology, cancer therapy and other diseases. Current medical research in cancer and other diseases, as it spans the bench to bedside.
PUL 192
Internship in Pulmonary Medicine
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing; approval of project by preceptor prior to internship.
Supervised work experience in pulmonary medicine. 
PUL 299
Pulmonary Disease Research
Consent of Instructor.  By arrangement only.
Pulmonary disease research activity with focus in inhalation toxicity, oxidants or lung biochemistry, and cell and molecular biology.
PUL 460
Comprehensive Pulmonary Medicine Clerkship 
Completion of second year of medical school and/or consent of instructor; completion of Internal Medicine Clerkship.
Rotation intended to provide a comprehensive student education in Pulmonary Medicine. Students will participate in hands on clinical education, as well as completing an assigned curricula. Intended for students pursuing Internal Medicine & Primary Care careers.
PUL 461
Critical Care Clinical Clerkship
Completion of second year of medical school and/or consent of instructor; completion of Internal Medicine and Surgical Clerkships.
Rotation intended to provide student education in the Critical Care Management of sub-specialty patients.  
PUL 462
Pulmonary Consult Clerkship
Completion of second year of medical school and/or consent of instructor; completion of Internal Medicine Clerkship.
Similar to PUL 460. Rotation designed for students interested in learning pulmonary medicine, but who desire more variety in their clerkships, and do not desire the comprehensive experience offered by a four-week pulmonary rotation.
PUL 470
Practicum in Care of the Terminally Ill
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to fourth-year Medical students in good standing.
Work with hospice interdisciplinary team. Direct experience in the care of patients with illnesses where no cure is possible. Emphasis on symptom relief, end of life issues, physician assisted suicide.
PUL 475
Encounters in Ethics in the ICU
Fourth-year Medical Student.
Care for critically ill adults with complex medical disease carries with it unique ethical roles and duties for the physician.
PUL 480
Pulmonary-Critical Care Medicine Insights
Consent of Instructor.  Student in good academic standing.
Attend respiratory outpatient clinics and in-patient pulmonary consultation rounds and medical intensive care rounds. Introduction to diagnosis and treatment of common pulmonary problems.
PUL 499
Research
Consent of Instructor.
Research opportunity in Pulmonary Medicine.
RAL 099
Directed Research Immunology 
Consent of Instructor.
Independent research will be encouraged in basic immunology, including the role of the cellular immune system in oncogenesis.
RAL 192
Internship in Rheumatology-Allergy
Upper division standing; approval of project by preceptor prior to internship.
Supervised work experience in rheumatology-allergy.
RAL 199
Directed Research in Immunology
Consent of Instructor.
Independent research will be encouraged in basic immunology, including the role of the cellular immune system in oncogenesis.
RAL 209
Current Topics in Immunology: From Presentations to Grants
IMM 201.
Current developments in various aspects of immunology and their interrelationships. Focus on areas of immunology not currently covered in the basic and advanced immunology courses. Oral presentation, written review and grant preparation.
RAL 298
Topics in Rheumatology & Clinical Immunology
Consent of Instructor.
Library and/or laboratory work as required.
RAL 299
Research in Autoimmune Disease
Consent of Instructor.
Independent research will be encouraged in both animal models of human disease (including congenitally athymic [nude], asplenic, and New Zealand mice) and the cellular immune system of patients with systemiclupus erythematosus, Sjgrens syndrome, polymyositis and drug hypersensitivity.
RAL 460
Rheumatology Clinical Clerkship
MDS 431 and Consent of Instructor.
Participation with members of the subspecialty service in the diagnosis and therapeutic management of patients with rheumatologic diseases.
RAL 461
Allergy Clinical Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of second year of medical school.
Student will work with practicing allergist in daily work with patients and participate in weekly allergy clinic and teaching conferences. Study of the literature. Will see patients with problems in clinical immunology, immunodeficiency, asthma, allergic rhinitis.
RAL 480
Insights in Rheumatology
Consent of Instructor.  Student in good academic standing.
Participation in rheumatology consultation rounds, rheumatic disease clinics and conferences with supervised readings in rheumatology.
RAL 499
Research
Medical student with consent of instructor.
Part-time participation in active clinical and basic research projects which can involve both patient care and relevant laboratory procedures.
RDI 413
Radiological Diagnosis II (Physics of Diagnostic Radiology)
Consent of Instructor.
Physics of diagnostic imaging; x-ray production and interaction; image formation; modulation transfer function; fluoroscopy; cine fluoroscopy; stereoscopy; xeroradiography; computerized and geometrical tomography;magnetic resonance and ultrasound. Principles of radiation protection in imaging will be covered.
RDI 414
Medical Radiation Biology 
Consent of Instructor.
Medical radiation biology; molecular cellular and organ system response to acute and chronic irradiation; radiation carcinogenesis and genetic effects; radiation risk assessment; diagnostic ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging health effects. Medical/legal considerations of radiation exposure.
RDI 430
Introduction to Clinical Radiology
Consent of Instructor.
Introduces students to common radiology tests, including limitations and risks by using ACR Appropriateness Criteria and incorporate patient specific clinical data into ordering and interpreting appropriate imaging tests.
RDI 461
Advanced Clinical Clerkship in Diagnostic Radiology
Consent of Instructor.  Satisfactory completion of second-year medical school curriculum and of third-year clerkships in Internal Medicine and General Surgery.Restricted to eight students per rotation; open to visiting medical students from accredited programs.
Work with clinical Radiologists in image interpretation fluoroscopy angiography image-guided intervention cardiac stress testing radionuclide therapy. Daily conferences in Radiology Diagnosis and Therapy Health Physics Radiation Safety. Prepare two clinical cases for in-class presentation. Assigned readings.
RDI 462
Diagnostic Imaging of Acquired & Congenital Heart Disease
RDI 461 (can be concurrent);  Fourth-year medical student in good academic standing.
Main emphasis on radiology of acquired and congenital heart disease, but also on magnetic resonance, nuclear medicine, and echocardiography of heart diseases.
RDI 473
Advanced Clinical Clerkship in Neuroradiology
Fourth-year medical student with interest in Diagnostic Radiology, Neuroradiology, Neurology, Neurosurgery, Psychiatry, Psychology, or related field; satisfactory completion of RDI 461, or the equivalent, is strongly encouraged.Restricted to one student per two-week or four-week rotation.
Work with Neuroradiologists in image interpretation of CT, MRI, and fluoroscopy. Opportunity to participate in assessment of Neurointerventional patients, and to observe Neurointerventional procedures. Daily conferences in Neuroimaging, General Radiology, Health Physics, and Radiology Safety. Assigned readings.
RDI 474
Advanced Clinical Clerkship in Pediatric Radiology
Fourth-year medical students with interest in Radiology and/or Pediatrics; interested third-year medical students who have successfully completed Pediatrics clinical clerkships may enroll, given availability and consent of the instructor of record; prior completion of PDI 461, or the equivalent, encouraged.Restricted to two students per two-week or four-week rotation.
Participation in the radiological care of Pediatric patients; evaluate the patient receiving the radiographic study, including pertinent historical/physical findings. Student expected to write up case files on interesting cases encountered during their rotation.  
RDI 475
Advanced Clinical Clerkship in Musculoskeletal Radiology (MSK)
Fourth-year medical student with interest in Musculoskeletal Radiology, Orthopedic Surgery, Sports Medicine, PMNR, or related field; satisfactory completion of RDI 461, or the equivalent, is strongly encouraged.Restricted to one student per two-week or four-week rotation.
Work with Musculoskeletal Radiologists in interpretation of CT, MRI, radiography, and fluoroscopy. Opportunity to assess patients for, and to observe image-guided procedures. Daily conferences in Musculoskeletal Imaging, General Radiology, Health Physics, and Radiology Safety. Assigned readings.
RDI 476
Advanced Clinical Clerkship Vascular/Interventional Radiology (IR)
Fourth-year medical student with interest in Diagnostic Radiology, Vascular/Interventional Radiology, Cardiovascular Imaging, Cardiology, Cardiovascular Surgery, Surgical Oncology, General Surgery, or related field; satisfactory completion of RDI 461, or the equivalent, is strongly encouraged.Restricted to one student per two-week or four-week rotation.
Medical student will work with Vascular/Interventional Radiologists in the evaluation of patients for interventional procedures. There will be opportunities to Daily conferences in Neuroimaging, General Radiology, Health Physics, and Radiology Safety. Assigned readings.
RDI 477
Advanced Clinical Clerkship in Ultrasound Radiology
Fourth-year medical student with interest in Radiology, OB/GYN, or in other medical or surgical subspecialties employing ultrasound in their clinical practice; prior completion of RDI 461, or the equivalent, is encouraged.Restricted to two students per two-week or four-week rotation.
Participation as an active team member on a busy clinical ultrasound service.  
RDI 480
Away Acting Internship in Radiology
Consent of Instructor.
Away Acting Internship rotation for Radiology and Nuclear Medicine.
RDI 498
Group Study in Diagnostic Radiology
Consent of Instructor.

RDI 499
Research in Diagnostic Radiology 
Consent of Instructor.
Approved for graduate degree credit.
REL 200A
Historical Roots of the Study of Religion
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Consideration of the historical and philosophical formation of religion as a concept. Treats the emergence of religion as a category of analysis and understanding from the Reformation through the Enlightenment.  
REL 200B
Foundational Theories of Religion
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Survey of classical 19th and 20th century approaches to the study of religion.
REL 200C
Contemporary Approaches to the Study of Religion
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Consideration of major themes, issues and methods in the contemporary study of religion.  Perspectives from diverse cultural settings employed to consider modern historical, philosophical, and social contexts that inform understandings of religion.
REL 210A
Special Topics in American Religious Cultures
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Comparative, interpretive study of the treatment of specific topics in American religious cultures.
REL 210B
Special Topics in Asian Religious Cultures
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Comparative, interpretive study of the treatment of specific topics in Asian religious cultures.
REL 210C
Special Topics in Mediterranean Religious Cultures
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Comparative, interpretive study of the treatment of specific topics in Mediterranean religious cultures.
REL 230A
Thematic Topics: Body & Praxis
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Comparative, interpretive study of the treatment of religion through specific topics and themes relating to the body and praxis.
REL 230B
Thematic Topics: Language, Rhetoric, & Performance
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Comparative, interpretive study of the treatment of religion through specific topics and themes relating to language, rhetoric, and performance.
REL 230C
Thematic Topics: Modernity, Science, & Secularism
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Comparative, interpretive study of the treatment of religion through specific topics and themes relating to modernity, science, and secularism.
REL 230D
Thematic Topics: Theory & Method
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Comparative, interpretive study of the treatment of religion through specific topics and themes relating to theory and method.
REL 230E
Thematic Topics: Values, Ethics, & Human Rights
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Comparative, interpretive study of the treatment of religion through specific topics and themes relating to values, ethics, and human rights.
REL 230F
Thematic Topics: Visual Culture, Media, & Technology
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Comparative, interpretive study of the treatment of religion through specific topics and themes relating to visual culture, media, and technology.
REL 231B
Theories of Language
Graduate standing.Restricted to graduate students.
Focuses on historical theories of language that precede and accompany post-structuralist theory. Intended to introduce graduate students to the context of modern theory formation. May cover structuralism, integrationalism, and grammaticalization. 
REL 231E
History, Theory & Criticism of Human Rights
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.Restricted to graduate students.
Introduces the advanced study of Human Rights and the theoretical and practical elaboration of the international Human Rights system. Seminar engages with criticism of Human Rights and develops research and teaching within disciplinary and interdisciplinary frameworks.
REL 298
Group Study
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Group Study
REL 299
Research
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Research
REL 299D
Dissertation Writing
Consent of Instructor.  Advanced to candidacy for the Ph.D. program.
Dissertation Writing.
RNU 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.

RNU 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.

RNU 299
Research: Special Study for Graduate Students
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

RNU 401
Biomedical Radiochemistry
Consent of Instructor.  Open to graduate and medical students.
Approved for graduate degree credit. Designed to combine basic nuclear physics, chemistry, and biology into a comprehensive and vigorous lecture-laboratory experience in biomedical nuclear chemistry. Subjects include choice and purification of appropriate gamma & beta radioisotopes, compounding biological pharmacodynamics and radioimmunoassay.
RNU 411
Radiological Physics I (Physics of Nuclear Medicine)
Consent of Instructor.
Physics of diagnostic and therapeutic nuclear medicine, nuclear physics, radioactive decay; interaction of ionizing radiation; dosimeters; attenuation; internal and external dosimetry; health physics; radiation detection and imaging, scintillation cameras, computerized planar and tomographic imaging. Offered at UC Davis Medical Center.
RNU 463
Clinical Clerkship in Nuclear Medicine
Consent of Instructor.  Satisfactory completion of second-year medical school; RDI 461 recommended.Limited enrollment.
Clerkship correlates radioisotopic methods with clinical, pathophysiological, and other diagnostic aspects of the patients care. Each patient reviewed with student by faculty member. Reading assignments, informal projects, and research techniques available.
RNU 498
Group Study in Nuclear Medicine
Consent of Instructor.
Approved for graduate degree credit.
RNU 499
Research in Nuclear Medicine
Consent of Instructor.
Research in Nuclear Medicine.
RON 211
Introduction to Radiation Oncology Physics
Consent of Instructor.  Restricted to physics and engineering graduate students and senior undergraduate physics majors.Limited to 3 students.
Introduction to radiation oncology physics. Overview of treatment methodologies. Medical physics equipment. Treatment machine dosimetry, including calibration. Machine quality assurance. Patient dosimetry. Treatment planning. Simulation and treatment. Treatment quality assurance, including calculation checks and chart checks. Brachytherapy.  
RON 299
Independent Study & Research 
Enrollment with a graduate group for Ph.D. candidacy and consent of group advisor and sponsor.
Research under supervision of Radiation Oncology faculty. Work must be appropriate to fulfill the requirements for the Ph.D. degree.
RON 420
Radiobiology Lecture Course
BIS 001A;  MAT 012;  PHY 001A.
Radiobiology lectures are designed to engage the physician residents, physics residents and medical students in learning Radiobiology principles and concepts during the year the Radiation Physics course is taught. 
RON 463
Radiation Oncology Clerkship
MDS 430;  MDS 431; third-year clinical clerkship; consent of instructor required.
Introduction to radiation oncology. Students will participate in workup and treatment planning for radiation oncology patients and will be introduced to the concepts involved in clinical radiation oncology, radiation biology, and radiation physics.
RON 465
Externship in Radiation Oncology
Consent of Instructor.
Externship provides in-depth exposure to the field of Radiation Oncology for students who rotation through an affiliated institution.
RON 499
Independent Study & Research in Therapeutic Radiology
Consent of Instructor.
Advanced-level research seminar in clinical and/or translational radiation oncology. Work with the course instructor to generate a testable hypothesis.
RST 010A
Contemporary Ethical Issues
RST 010 (can be concurrent);  RST 010 required concurrently; GE topical breadth and diversity credit only with concurrent enrollment in RST 010.Restricted to students enrolled in course 10.
Discussion of the readings assigned for course 10 and completion of a major research paper. 
RST 010A
Contemporary Ethical Issues
RST 010 (can be concurrent);  RST 010 required concurrently; GE topical breadth and diversity credit only with concurrent enrollment in RST 010.Concurrent enrollment in RST 010 required. 
Discussion of the readings assigned for RST 010 and completion of a major research paper. 
RST 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.  Primarily for lower division students.

RST 099
Special Study for Lower Division Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

RST 102
Christian Origins
Consent of Instructor.
Development of Christianity from the end of the 1st century through the major controversies of the 5th century. Emphasis on the relationship between the new religious movement and the Roman Empire, and issues of early Christian identity and diversity.
RST 103
Medieval & Byzantine Christianity
Consent of Instructor.
Christianity in Europe and the Near East from the year 600 to 1450. Focus on the development of Catholic and Orthodox traditions in ritual, art, and thought, with attention to interactions between regional groups, and Christian interaction with Islam.
RST 110
Life, Meaning & Identity
Upper division standing.
Study of religious lives, the quest for meaning and for personal identity; how religions frame the problems of life; how cultural and personal crises affect youthful identity; the nature and structure of dreams, myths, and ideals.
RST 115
Mysticism
One lower division Religious Studies course.
Historical and descriptive analysis of selected key figures in mystical traditions and readings of representative mystical texts. Analytic term paper.
RST 122
Studies in Biblical Texts
RST 021.
Study of a book from the Prophets or writings from critical, historical, and religious perspectives. 
RST 124
Topics in Judaism
RST 023;  RST 021.
Examination of selected aspects of Jewish life, religion, or literature. Potential topics include: Jewish Perspectives on Jesus; The Golem: History and Legend; Sexuality and Gender in Late Antique Judaism and Early Christianity.
RST 125
Dead Sea Scrolls, Apocrypha, & Pseudepigrapha
RST 021;  or Consent of Instructor.
Survey of the Dead Sea Scrolls, apocryphal and pseudepigraphical writings of Judaism and Christianity and their historical, social, and religious importance.
RST 126
The Formation of the Rabbinic Tradition
RST 021;  RST 023;  (RST 040 or RST 125).
Survey of the classical rabbinic Jewish texts such as the Talmud and of the social and historical contexts of their production in Palestine and Babylonia. 
RST 130
Topics in Religious Studies
RST 001 or RST 002 or RST 003A or RST 003B or RST 003C;  or Consent of Instructor.
Thematic study of a phenomenon in more than one religious tradition or of the relationship between religion and another cultural phenomenon. Topics may include archeology and the Bible, women and religion, religion and violence. 
RST 132
Topics in Mediterranean Ancient Religion 
RST 021;  RST 040;  or Consent of Instructor.
Thematic study of specific sociological, literary or theological theme across the religious traditions of the ancient Mediterranean/Near East: Greek and Roman religions, Judaism, Christianity, Zoroastrianism, Manichaeism, etc. Topics may include creation, sacrifice, priesthoods, prophecies, holy books, the afterlife. 
RST 132
Topics in Mediterranean Ancient Religion 
Consent of Instructor.
Thematic study of specific sociological, literary or theological theme across the religious traditions of the ancient Mediterranean/Near East: Greek and Roman religions, Judaism, Christianity, Zoroastrianism, Manichaeism, etc. Topics may include creation, sacrifice, priesthoods, prophecies, holy books, the afterlife. 
RST 135
The Bible & Film
HUM 010 recommended.
Examination of the uses of the Judeo-Christian Scriptures in film. Topics include dramatic depictions of biblical stories, the tension between science and religion, allegorical treatments of biblical themes, and the problems of religious conviction.
RST 140
Christian Theology
Consent of Instructor.
Historical and systematic introduction to Christian doctrine, with attention to divergent traditions and the problem of orthodoxy and heresy.
RST 141A
New Testament Literature: Synoptic Gospels
Consent of Instructor.
Life and thought of the early Church as reflected by the Synoptic Tradition; Matthew, Mark, Luke and Acts. Offered every third year to alternate with RST 141B, RST 141C.
RST 141B
New Testament Literature: John
Consent of Instructor.
Life and thought of the early Church as reflected by the Johannine Tradition; the Gospel and letters of John. Offered every third year to alternate with RST 141A, RST 141C.
RST 141C
New Testament Literature: Paul
Consent of Instructor.
Life and thought of the early Church as reflected by the Pauline tradition. The letters of Paul. Offered every third year to alternate with RST 141A, RST 141B.
RST 143
New Testament Apocrypha
Consent of Instructor.
Extra-canonical Christian writings and their reception, from antiquity to the present. Emphasis on the importance of New Testament figures both as literary characters and as authors within different Christian traditions.
RST 144
History of the Bible
RST 021 or RST 040.
History of the formation of the Christian biblical canon, with emphasis on differences between Christian traditions; survey of translations and adaptations of biblical narrative in Christianity, Judaism, and Islam, as well as in contemporary culture.
RST 145
Contemporary American Religion
RST 040 and HIS 017B recommended.
Examination of several major movements and phenomena in 20th-century American religion.
RST 150
Religious Ethics
RST 010 recommended.
Study of the religious bases of ethics through examination of ethical problems that arise in different religious cultures around the world and in nations where multiple religious cultures face similar issues.
RST 156
Religion & the Performing Arts in India
RST 030;  RST 068;  or Consent of Instructor.
Survey of religion and performing arts in India. Emphasis on the influence of colonialism, nationalism, and regionalism on the history of Indian performing arts.
RST 160
Introduction to Islamic Thought
RST 060 recommended.
The development of Islamic thought from the first centuries of Islam to the 18th century. Theology, philosophy, ethics, Sufism, historiography, political theory, fundamentalism, al-Farabi, al-Ghazzali, Ibn Rushd, Tusi, Ibn al-Arabi, Rumi, Molla Sadra, Ibn Khaldun, Ibn Abd al-Wahhab.
RST 162
Introduction to Islamic Law
RST 060 recommended.
The development of Islamic law in the formative centuries of Islam, ca. 600-1000, as well as its adaptation to changing economic, social, and political conditions in subsequent periods. Legal schools, legal theory, the Shari'a, reformist movements, human rights. 
RST 163
Social Life of Islam
RST 060 or HIS 006 recommended.
Introduction to culture and social life in Muslim societies.  Focus on the plurality of traditions in Muslim faith, reason, and everyday practice.  Special attention to Muslim rituals, ethical values, verbal genres, family life, sexuality and veiling, and youth culture.  
RST 175A
Chinese Intellectual Traditions: Daoist Traditions
A course in Chinese history recommended.
English-language survey of key Daoist texts and scholarship. Topics include Daoist concepts of the cosmos, the natural world, scripture, the body, and immortality; Daoist divinities; Daoism and the state.
RST 181
Hindu Gods & Hindu Symbols
RST 068: Hinduism or RST 069: Hindu Mythology recommended, but not required.
A historical survey of the development of the language of symbolism and iconography in Hinduism. 
RST 189
Senior Colloquium
Consent of Instructor.
Primarily for seniors in Religious Studies. Discussion in depth of a problem in religion which requires the methods of several disciplines and is important in the encounter between religions.
RST 190
Seminar
Consent of Instructor.  Required of all Religious Studies majors.
Allows majors to integrate their disciplined study of the field. Emphasis on current scholarly debate about the methods for analyzing and comparing diverse religious traditions.
RST 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.

RST 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

RST 201
Methods & Issues in Religious Studies
Graduate standing.
Focuses on controversies in the study of comparative religion. How is religion best defined? Are there methods unique to the study of religion? What does the study of religion contribute to the study of society in general? 
RST 210
Religion & Postcoloniality, or Savages, Civilization, & Spirituality
Graduate standing.
Examines relations between religion and colonialisms. Using specific historical situations it explores some of our thorniest theoretical problems. Acquire a solid understanding of postcolonial theory and the historical tools to critically engage religion in the present.
RST 215
Topics in the History of Christianity
Graduate standing.
Selected topics in the history of Christianity. Intended for graduate students seeking to do advanced work in the study of Christianity. May cover issues in Christian thought from antiquity, the middle ages, the early modern or modern period.
RST 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

RUS 002
Elementary Russian
RUS 001.
Continuation of grammar and language skills developed in RUS 001.
RUS 003
Elementary Russian
RUS 002.
Continuation of grammar and language skills developed in RUS 002.
RUS 004
Intermediate Russian
RUS 003.
Grammar review and conversational practice in Russian.
RUS 005
Intermediate Russian
RUS 004.
Grammar review. Introduction to literature in its sociopolitical context. Conversational practice.
RUS 006
Intermediate Russian
RUS 005.
Grammar review. Intermediate conversation and continued reading of literature. Social and cultural practices in contemporary Russia; introduction to Russian history.
RUS 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

RUS 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

RUS 101A
Advanced Russian
RUS 006;  or Consent of Instructor.
Topics in Russian. Grammar for the advanced student. Reading and discussion of journalistic texts and classic and contemporary literature. Conversation exercises utilizing literary and colloquial variants of current Russian speech.
RUS 101B
Advanced Russian
RUS 101A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Continuation of RUS 101A. Topics in Russian grammar for the advanced student. Reading and discussion of journalistic texts and classic and contemporary literature. Conversational exercises utilizing literary and colloquial variants of current Russian speech.
RUS 101C
Advanced Russian
RUS 101B.
Continuation of RUS 101B. Topics in Russian grammar for the advanced student. Reading and discussion of journalistic texts and classic and contemporary literature. Conversational exercises utilizing literary and colloquial variants of current Russian speech.
RUS 102
Russian Composition
RUS 006;  or Consent of Instructor.
Practice in writing Russian.  One composition on a different topic each week.  Topics include: history, geography, politics, and literature of Russia; comparison of Russian and American lifestyles; current events.  Conducted in Russian.
RUS 103
Literary Translation
RUS 101C.
Translation of Russian literary texts into stylistically equivalent idiomatic English.
RUS 105
Advanced Russian Conversation
RUS 006.
Intensive conversational practice and discussion based on current events and contemporary texts.
RUS 120
Topics in Russian Literature & Culture
Upper division standing or consent of instructor.
Knowledge of Russian not required. Investigation of significant themes and issues of Russian literature and culture within their European context.
RUS 122
19th-Century Russian Literature
RUS 101C when offered in Russian; no prerequisite when offered in English.Not open to students who have taken RUS 121 and RUS 127.
Study of Russian literature (prose fiction, drama, poetry) from the period between 1800 and the end of the 19th century. May include authors like Pushkin, Lermontov, Gogol, Turgenev, Dostoevsky, Tolstoy, Chekhov. Offered alternately in English or Russian. 
RUS 124
20th-Century Russian Literature
RUS 101C when offered in Russian; no prerequisite when offered in English.
Study of Russian literature (prose, drama, poetry) from the period between 1900 and the end of the 20th century. Authors like Y. Olesha, M. Bulgakov, D. Kharms, and L. Petrushevskaia. Taught in Russian.
RUS 126
The Russian Theater  
RUS 101C;  or Consent of Instructor.
The main works of Russian dramatists from Fonvizin to the present, including Gogol, Turgenev, Tolstoy, Ostrovsky, Chekhov, Blok, Mayakovsky, Kharms.  Conducted in Russian.
RUS 129
Russian Film
Completion of Subject A requirements.
History of Russian film; film & social revolution, the cult of Stalin, dissident visions; film & the collapse of the Soviet empire; gender and the nation in Russian film. Taught in English; Russian films with English subtitles.
RUS 130
Contemporary Russian Culture
Consent of Instructor.
Trends in Russian culture and the relationship between artists and the government. Topics: recent changes in the cultural scene, postmodernist trends in literature, visual art, film, and theater.   
RUS 139
Pushkin  
RUS 101C;  or Consent of Instructor.
Three major periods of Pushkin's poetical works: his early Lyceum verse; his poetry of the early 1820s; and the mature period. Further study of Pushkin's prose fiction, drama, and journalism.
RUS 192
Research Essay
A Russian literature course; may be taken concurrently.
Research essay, based on primary and secondary sources, dealing in depth with a topic arising from or related to the prerequisite literature course.
RUS 194H
Special Study for Honors Students
Open only to majors of senior standing who qualify for honors program.
Guided research, under the direction of a faculty member, leading to a senior honors thesis on a topic in Russian studies.
RUS 195H
Honors Thesis
RUS 194H.
Writing an honors thesis, under the direction of a faculty member, on a topic in Russian studies.
RUS 197T
Tutoring in Russian
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Tutoring in undergraduate courses, including leadership in small voluntary discussion groups affiliated with departmental courses.
RUS 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

RUS 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

RUS 299
Individual Study
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.Restricted to graduate students.

RUS 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Graduate standing.

SAF 090X
SA & FS Portfolio 
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to Sustainable Agriculture & Food Systems majors with lower-division standing or consent of instructor. 
SA&FS Portfolios are designed to complement interdisciplinary, academic coursework by supporting student development of each of the SA&FS Student Learning Outcomes: Systems Thinking, Experimentation & Inquiry, Understanding Values, Interpersonal Communication, Strategic Management, Civic Engagement and Personal Development. 
SAF 092
Internship 
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to Sustainable Agriculture & Food Systems majors or with consent of instructor; non-majors by consent of instructor. 
Lower-division internship for students enrolled in the Sustainable Agriculture & Food Systems program of study.
SAF 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to Sustainable Agriculture & Food Systems major or with consent of instructor. 
Group study on focused topics in Sustainable Agriculture & Food Systems. Varies according to instructor. Course plan is adapted to student need and interest in conjunction with the expertise of the instructor.
SAF 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.
Under faculty supervision, students pursue a special or individualized course of study related to Sustainable Agriculture & Food Systems. 
SAF 192
Internship 
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.Restricted to Sustainable Agriculture & Food Systems majors or non-majors by consent of instructor.
Upper-division internship for students enrolled in the Sustainable Agriculture & Food Systems program of study. 
SAF 197T
Tutoring in Sustainable Agriculture & Food Systems
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Undergraduates assist the instructor by tutoring students in regularly scheduled courses that fulfill SA&FS major requirements. 
SAF 197TC
SA&FS Tutoring in the Community
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Undergraduates assist the instructor by tutoring in the community in settings related to Sustainable Agriculture & Food Systems. 
SAF 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.Restricted to Sustainable Agriculture & Food Systems major or with consent of instructor.
Group study on focused topics in Sustainable Agriculture & Food Systems. Varies according to instructor. Course plan is adapted to student need and interest in conjunction with the expertise of the instructor.
SAF 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Under faculty supervision, advanced students pursue a special or individualized course of study related to Sustainable Agriculture & Food Systems. 
SAS 012
Plants & Society
High school biology.
Dependence of human societies on plant and plant products. Plants as resources for food, fiber, health, enjoyment and environmental services. Sustainable uses of plants for food production, raw materials, bioenergy, and environmental conservation. Global population growth and future food supplies.
SAS 090A
Issues in Environmental & Resource Sciences
Limited to lower division students.
Discussion of historical and current issues in environmental and resource sciences. Lectures, reading and field trips will provide background for selected topics.
SAS 090X
Lower Division Seminar
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.Limited enrollment.
Examination of a special topic in Science & Society through shared readings, discussions, written assignments, or special activities such as fieldwork, laboratory work, etc. 
SAS 092
Internship in Science & Society
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.
Supervised internship on and off campus, in the community, or in institutional settings.
SAS 097T
Tutoring in Science & Society
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing; completion of course being tutored.
Tutoring in undergraduate Science & Society courses. Assisting with leading discussion groups under supervision of instructor(s) and teaching assistants. Acting as liaison between the students and course instructor(s) to foster effective communication and interaction.
SAS 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

SAS 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.

SAS 110
Applications of Evolution in Medicine, Human Behavior, & Agriculture
BIS 002A;  BIS 002B;  BIS 002C.Limited to 60 students.
Applications of evolutionary biology in medicine, human behavior, and agriculture. Examination of the imprint of evolution on the human life cycle from conception to death.
SAS 120
Science & Contemporary Societal Issues
Upper division standing.
Study of a contemporary societal issue/problem emphasizing critical thinking with information drawn from several disciplines. Multiple instructors illustrate the necessity of an interdisciplinary and cooperative approach in solving important issues. Topics will vary.
SAS 130
Contemporary Leadership
Consent of Instructor.Limited to 40 students.
Leadership, including issues, skills, and practices as they relate to individuals, organizations, diverse social settings and communities. Written and verbal communications, personality styles for collaborative work, and ethics.
SAS 145
Digital Communication in Agricultural, Environmental, & Human Sciences
Consent of Instructor.
Use digital media to communicate a succinct, compelling story. In lecture, discussion and activities, create storyboards and scripts, use video, audio, and editing technology, and produce a short media-rich video to effectively convey a message.
SAS 190X
Science & Society Seminar
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.Limited to 20 students.
In-depth examination at an upper division level of a special topic in Science and Society. Emphasis upon student participation in learning.  
SAS 192
Internship in Science & Society
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Supervised internship on or off campus, in the community, or in institutional settings.
SAS 197T
Tutoring in Science & Society
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing; completion of course being tutored or the equivalent.
Tutoring of students in Science & Society courses. Assistance with discussion groups and laboratory sections under supervision of instructor.
SAS 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.
SAS 199
Special Study in Science & Society
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.

SAS 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

SAS 299
Graduate Research
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate student.

SAS 390
Teaching Methods in Science & Society
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate level.
Practical experience in methods and problems related to teaching Science & Society courses. Discussion of critical pedagogies specific to teaching of science-societal issues, preparing for and conducting discussion sessions, analyses of texts and supporting material, formulation of assignments, exams.
SOC 030B
Intercultural Relations in Multicultural Societies
SOC 030A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Social-psychological analysis of personal experiences living in a multicultural society; conforming to or rejecting group identity or stereotypes; managing and reducing conflict; cross-cultural communication; promises and problems of diversity at UC Davis. Second course in a two-course Multicultural Immersion Program.
SOC 090X
Lower Division Seminar
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.Limited enrollment.
Examination of a special topic in sociology through shared readings, discussions, written assignments, or special activities such as fieldwork, laboratory work, etc. May not be repeated for credit.
SOC 090X
Lower Division Seminar
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.Limited enrollment.
Examination of a special topic in sociology through shared readings, discussions, written assignments, or special activities such as fieldwork, laboratory work, etc. May not be repeated for credit.
SOC 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Primarily intended for lower division students.
SOC 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

SOC 100
Origins of Modern Sociological Theory
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Origins of modern sociological thought. Special emphasis on three major theorists from the classical tradition of 19th-century European social thought: Karl Marx, Max Weber, and Emile Durkheim.  
SOC 102
Society & Culture of California
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
California's distinctive society and culture; sociological analyses of topical issues concerning diversity, environment, cities.
SOC 102
Society & Culture of California
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
California's distinctive society and culture; sociological analyses of topical issues concerning diversity, environment, cities.
SOC 103
Evaluation Research Methods
SOC 001 or SOC 002 or SOC 003 recommended; SOC 046A and SOC 046B recommended.
Surveys applications of research methods to the evaluation of social programs, primarily emphasizing methodological issues, e.g., research design and data collection; uses of evaluation research are also discussed and placed in theoretical context. Participation in an evaluation project.
SOC 104
The Political Economy of International Migration
SOC 001, SOC 002, SOC 003, or SOC 004 recommended.
Analysis of worldwide migration patterns, and social scientific theories of international and transnational migration. Focus in economical, political, and social impact of immigration and potential for international and regional cooperation.
SOC 106
Intermediate Social Statistics
SOC 046B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Intermediate level course in statistical analysis of social data, emphasizing the logic and use of statistical measures, procedures, and mathematical models especially relevant to sociological analysis.
SOC 118
Political Sociology
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Relation of social cleavages and social cohesion to the functioning of political institutions; the social bases of local and national power structures; social sources of political movement, analysis of concepts of alienation, revolution, ideology, ruling class, and elite.
SOC 120
Deviance
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Social structural sources, institutional practices and microprocessesassociated with illegality, evil, disease, immorality, disability, racial and class differences, citizenship, and the body. Special emphasis on expert knowledge and the production and management of social difference.
SOC 122
Sociology of Adolescence
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Chronological age and social status; analysis of social processes bearing upon the socialization of children and adolescents. The emergence of youth cultures. Generational succession as a cultural problem.
SOC 124
Education & Inequality in the U.S.
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Functions of schooling in contemporary U.S. society. Racial, ethnic, social class, and gender inequalities in student outcomes. Consideration of classic and current controversies in the sociology of education and education policy. 
SOC 125
Sociology of Culture
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Sociological approaches to study of historical and contemporary culture and mass media, and their structuring in relation to social actors, institutions, stratification, power, the production of culture, audiences, and the significance of culture in processes of change.
SOC 126
Social Interaction
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Everyday interaction in natural settings; ethnographic approaches to the understanding of social meanings, situations, personal identity and human relationships. Particular attention to the work of Erving Goffman and to principles of field observation and qualitative analysis.
SOC 128
Interracial Interpersonal Dynamics
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Analysis of the influences of cultural differences and racial stratification on interpersonal interaction in instrumental settings (e.g., work, education, political action) and intimate settings (e.g., friendship, love, marriage, family). Minority/majority relationships.
SOC 129
Sociology of Black Experience in America
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Survey of historical and contemporary theoretical sociological perspectives on the Black experience in United States. Emphasis on comparisons of Black sociological perspectives and mainstream perspectives of specific sociologists.
SOC 130
Race Relations
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Functions of the social definitions of race and racial groups. Analysis of racial conflict, oppression, and other forms of ethnic stratification. Models of ethnic interaction and social change. Emphasis on racial relationships within the U.S.
SOC 131
The Family
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Contemporary family life in historical and cross-cultural perspective. How different family forms arose, their significance today and prospects for further family change. Attention to power relations within and beyond the family and to the social implications of family transformation.
SOC 132
The Sociology of Gender
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Analysis of biological, psychological, cultural and structural conditions underlying the status and roles of men and women in contemporary society, drawing on a historical and comparative perspective.
SOC 133
Sexual Stratification & Politics
Consent of Instructor.  SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Analysis of origins, dynamics, and social implications of sexual stratification. Examination of classical and contemporary theorists such as Engels, Freud, J.S. Mill, de Beauvoir, Juliet Mitchell, D. Dinnerstein. Attention to selected issues in social movements for and against sexual equality.
SOC 134
Sociology of Racial Ethnic Families
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Asian American, Black, Chicano, and Native American family life in comparative historical perspective. Family structure and gender roles are considered in relation to socio-historical dynamics.
SOC 134
Sociology of Racial Ethnic Families
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Asian American, Black, Chicano, and Native American family life in comparative historical perspective. Family structure and gender roles are considered in relation to socio-historical dynamics.
SOC 135
Social Relationships
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Social and cultural factors influencing friendships and intimate relationships. Topics include relationship development, relationship maintenance, and relationship loss.
SOC 137
African American Society & Culture 1790 to 1990
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Political and social transformations of African American communities between 1790 and 1990, as seen through film, literature, and music. Topics include: Black consciousness, Afro-Slave culture, The Harlem Renaissance, and contemporary Hip Hop.
SOC 138
Economic Sociology
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Overview of the rapidly growing field of economic sociology. Focus on variations in the ways that markets are organized. The relationship between individual and collective rationality will also be emphasized.
SOC 139
Corporations & Society
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Study of the history and power of the modern corporation; corporate organization; politics, the state, and the corporation; labor unions and the labor process; competition, regulation and international markets; the multinational and conglomerate corporation; and mass markets and consumerism.
SOC 140
Social Stratification
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Systems of social ranking, theories of stratification; power, prestige, culture, and styles of life of various social classes; social mobility and its consequences for social structure.
SOC 141
Industrialization & Social Change
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Selected technological and social factors. Preconditions of economic development and industrialization. Social, political, and cultural issues at various levels of economic development. Major historical differences and major current trends. Emphasis either on highly industrialized countries or on less developed countries.
SOC 143A
Urban Society
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Theories of city origins. Analysis of the historic process of urbanization and of varying city types. Comparison of American and European experience of metropolitanization,counterurbanization,and neighborhood change. Consideration of competing theories of urban growth and change and competing visions of the urban future.
SOC 143B
Sociology of City Life
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Critical dissection of the loss of community issue. Analysis of the organization of primary ties in the city, of the culture of urban public life and of the learning of city skills.
SOC 144
Agriculture & Society
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Development of agriculture as a major enterprise in modern society with the concomitant reduction in the labor force and family farms. Analysis of issues including mechanization, migrant labor, corporate farming, and public resource policy.
SOC 145A
Sociology of Third World Development
SOC 001;  Upper division standing.
Introduction to theories and contemporary issues in the sociology of development. Topics such as urbanization, rural/agrarian change, class, status groups, international division of labor, sectoral shifts, international capital, informal economy, gender, and political processes are analyzed within a comparative-historical framework.
SOC 145A
Sociology of Third World Development
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Introduction to theories and contemporary issues in the sociology of development. Topics such as urbanization, rural/agrarian change, class, status groups, international division of labor, sectoral shifts, international capital, informal economy, gender, and political processes are analyzed within a comparative-historical framework.
SOC 145B
Gender & Rural Development in the Third World
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Political-economic analysis of women and work during the process of socioeconomic change in the world with particular attention to the family/household context.
SOC 146
Sociology of Religion
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Relationship between social structures and religions. The social setting of the major world religions. Religious innovators and institutionalization (churches, sects, cults). Secularization in the modern world and the rise of secular ideologies.
SOC 147
Sociological Perspectives on East Asia
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Sociological theories and concepts applied toward understanding East Asian society. Emphasis on the political structure, stratification, and economy in China and Japan. Analysis of historical and contemporary similarities and differences.
SOC 148
Collective Behavior
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Study of behavior of human crowds and masses in extraordinary circumstances, including crowd panics, mass scares, collective protests, riots, revolutionary situations, ecstatic and revivalist gatherings, crazes, fads, and fashions.
SOC 149
Religion & American Society
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Historical, contemporary survey of religious traditions and organizations and their relation to U.S. social and cultural patterns. Civil religion, religious pluralism, minority and deviant communities, religious migration, U.S. religion as a social institution, and religion, politics, and social stratification.
SOC 149
Religion & American Society
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Historical, contemporary survey of religious traditions and organizations and their relation to U.S. social and cultural patterns. Civil religion, religious pluralism, minority and deviant communities, religious migration, U.S. religion as a social institution, and religion, politics, and social stratification.
SOC 150
Criminology 
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Sociological analysis of criminal behavior in relation to social structure and the criminalization process.
SOC 151
The Criminal Justice System
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Sociological analysis of the different components of the criminal justice system including the emergence and interpretation of criminal laws, the contemporary roles and functions of the police, criminal courts and correctional institutions.
SOC 152
Juvenile Delinquency
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Study of juvenile delinquency in relation to the family, peer groups, community, and institutional structures. Consideration of processing of the delinquent by formal agencies of control.
SOC 153
The Sociology of Childhood
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Contemporary childhood in historical, cross-cultural, and global perspectives. Examine changes in understanding of the nature of childhood and "best interests of the child" by class, race, gender, geographic region, and historical period.
SOC 154
Health & Illness
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Theoretical tools for understanding the social determinants of health and health care, including such topics as health policy, social sources of illness, social construction of illness, medicalization, social disparities in health, and the illness experience.
SOC 154
Health & Illness
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Theoretical tools for understanding the social determinants of health and health care, including such topics as health policy, social sources of illness, social construction of illness, medicalization, social disparities in health, and the illness experience.
SOC 155
Sociology of Law
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Law considered as social control; relation of legal institutions to society as affecting judicial decision making and administration of justice. Lawyers as an occupational group. Legal reform.
SOC 156
Social Movements
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Analysis of several aspects of social movements: mobilization, forms of organization, ideology, recruitment, leadership, strategies and tactics, development, effects. Frequent use of sound and film materials.
SOC 157
Social Conflict
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Analysis of the causes, dynamics, and regulation of social conflict within and between various kinds of social groupings with particular reference to nonviolent methods of waging and regulating conflict.
SOC 158
Women's Social Movements in Latin America
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Contemporary women's social movements in Latin America, focusing on Honduras, El Salvador, Brazil, and Nicaragua. Examination of exploitation and oppression in Latin America. 
SOC 158
Women's Social Movements in Latin America
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Contemporary women's social movements in Latin America, focusing on Honduras, El Salvador, Brazil, and Nicaragua. Examination of exploitation and oppression in Latin America. 
SOC 159
Work, Employment, & Careers in the 21st Century
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Historical and contemporary overview of employment, work, and occupations in American society. Study of authority and power relations, labor markets, control systems, stratification, and corporate structures, and how these factors shape work in diverse or organizational and employment setting.
SOC 160
Sociology of the Environment
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Production, consumption, and urban expansion. Basic social logics surrounding current problems of resource scarcity (environmental extractions) and excess wastes (environmental additions). Ways that society can change and re-organize itself to become more environmentally conscious and hence ecologically sustainable.
SOC 161
The Civil Justice System
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Empirical studies of the different aspects of the civil justice system in the United States and Global Society including the litigation, juries, civil rights, and international laws relating to trade, the environment, and human rights.
SOC 162
Society, Culture, & Health
SOC 001, SOC 002, SOC 003, or SOC 006 recommended.
Analysis of how socio-cultural factors shape illness experience. Evaluation of how certain conditions come to be understood as health conditions; illness identities and biographies; doctor-patient interactions; biomedical cultures; and how race, ethnicity, and gender shape health practices. 
SOC 163
Population Health: Social Determinants & Disparities in Health
SOC 001, SOC 002, SOC 003, or SOC 006 recommended.
Survey of the social determinants and disparities in health: measurement of population health; health transitions and global disparities; domestic disparities in health by class, race/ethnicity, nativity, gender, and sexual orientation; social determinants including social support, social stress, neighborhoods, and policy.
SOC 164
Health Policy & Politics
SOC 001, SOC 002, SOC 003, or SOC 006 recommended.
Introduction to health policy and politics, including health care access and delivery, and policies related to health inequalities, the social determinants of illness and health behaviors.
SOC 170
Population
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Introduction to the study of human population, including theories and statistical measures; social causes and consequences of population trends; changes in population structure; geographical distribution, migration, sociopsychological factors affecting fertility.
SOC 171
Sociology of Violence & Inequality
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
How systems of social inequality organize the practice of violence. Definitions of violence and issues affecting the social capacity for violence. Analysis and comparison of different forms of violence associated with race, class, gender relations and social organization.
SOC 172
Ideology of Class, Race & Gender
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Examination of popular belief systems that accompany relations between social classes, whites and blacks, and men and women in the United States. How do dominant groups attempt to justify each relationship, and is there ideological conflict or consensus between groups.
SOC 172
Ideology of Class, Race & Gender
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Examination of popular belief systems that accompany relations between social classes, whites and blacks, and men and women in the United States. How do dominant groups attempt to justify each relationship, and is there ideological conflict or consensus between groups.
SOC 173
Sociology Through Literature
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Introduction to analysis of literature as sociological data. Reading of numerous works on American and other societies by authors such as Steinbeck, Lewis, Dreiser, Schulberg, Orwell, etc.
SOC 174
American Jewish Identities & Communities
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Sociology of Jewish life, analyzing challenges to Jewish identity and community in the diaspora. Diversity within the Jewish community, Americanization, women, new immigrants, post-Holocaust Jewish identity, and LGBT Jews.
SOC 175
Mass Communication
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Examines the relationship between the media and social structures. History of mediastate relations. Media as reflector and shaper of values. Emphasis on current European and Marxist and pluralist theories rather than on content analysis.
SOC 175
Mass Communication
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Examines the relationship between the media and social structures. History of mediastate relations. Media as reflector and shaper of values. Emphasis on current European and Marxist and pluralist theories rather than on content analysis.
SOC 176
Sociology of Knowledge, Science, & Scientific Knowledge
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Social, cultural, and historical dimensions of knowledge, especially scientific knowledge. Problems, methods, and theory in sociology of scientific knowledge. Laboratory and historical case studies. Scientific and technical knowledge in institutional and organizational contexts.
SOC 178
Punishment & Corrections
SOC 001, 002, or 003 recommended.
Origins, characteristics, and consequences of various sanctions and punishment regimes including fines, banishment, incarceration, deportation, and execution.
SOC 180A
Complex Organizations
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Develops a sociological approach to organizations theory. Designed tointroduce sociological concepts, address the alternative psychological and economic models, and involve students in the practice of organizational analysis.
SOC 180B
Complex Organizations
Consent of Instructor.  SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Builds on concepts and skills developed in SOC 180A. Deals with the issues of organizational decision making, design, and survival. Emphasis on relations between organizations and the effects of those relations in both the public and private sectors.
SOC 180B
Complex Organizations
Consent of Instructor.  SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Builds on concepts and skills developed in SOC 180A. Deals with the issues of organizational decision making, design, and survival. Emphasis on relations between organizations and the effects of those relations in both the public and private sectors.
SOC 181
Social Change Organization
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Analysis of organizations with social change and improvement goals and programs, emphasizing voluntary associations and grassroots citizen groups. Topics treated include formation, decision making and leadership, strategies and tactics, factionalism and coalitions, effectiveness.
SOC 181
Social Change Organization
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Analysis of organizations with social change and improvement goals and programs, emphasizing voluntary associations and grassroots citizen groups. Topics treated include formation, decision making and leadership, strategies and tactics, factionalism and coalitions, effectiveness.
SOC 182
Utopian Communal Groups & Movements 
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Formations, structures, and social life of historical and contemporary countercultural, utopian, dystopian, intentional, and religious communal settlements and movements, including comparison with other small settlement forms such as monasteries, villages, neighborhoods, encampments, and communities.
SOC 182
Utopian Communal Groups & Movements 
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Formations, structures, and social life of historical and contemporary countercultural, utopian, dystopian, intentional, and religious communal settlements and movements, including comparison with other small settlement forms such as monasteries, villages, neighborhoods, encampments, and communities.
SOC 183
Comparative Organizations
SOC 001, SOC 002 or SOC 003 recommended; SOC 180A recommended.
Examination of the economic, cultural, and political organization of major industrial and developing nations. Discussion of patterns and practices, alternative theoretical models of explanation, and case studies of organizations. Societies may include Japan, Germany, Egypt, China, and the U.S. 
SOC 183
Comparative Organizations
SOC 001, SOC 002 or SOC 003 recommended; SOC 180A recommended.
Examination of the economic, cultural, and political organization of major industrial and developing nations. Discussion of patterns and practices, alternative theoretical models of explanation, and case studies of organizations. Societies may include Japan, Germany, Egypt, China, and the U.S. 
SOC 185
Social Policy
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Examination of social policies that affect the well-being of individuals, families and groups, including such policies as old-age pensions, health insurance, and aid to the poor.
SOC 185Y
Social Policy (Hybrid Version)
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Examination of social policies that affect the well-being of individuals, families and groups, including such policies as old-age pensions, health insurance, and aid to the poor.
SOC 188
Markets, Culture & Inequality in China
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Economic and political systems and patterns of social interaction and inequality in China. State and corporate structures and practices, market and consumer behaviors, social mobility and stratification, protest and resistance.
SOC 189
Social Science Writing
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Improved analytic writing and methods for reporting social science research to a wider public. Sociological analysis of the conditions of good and bad writing.
SOC 189
Social Science Writing
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Improved analytic writing and methods for reporting social science research to a wider public. Sociological analysis of the conditions of good and bad writing.
SOC 190X
Seminar in Sociological Analysis
SOC 100;  Upper division standing; SOC 100 (former SOC 165A).Limited enrollment.
In-depth examination at an upper division level of a special topic in Sociology. Emphasis on student participation in learning. May not be repeated for credit.
SOC 190X
Seminar in Sociological Analysis
SOC 100;  Upper division standing; SOC 100 (former SOC 165A).Limited enrollment.
In-depth examination at an upper division level of a special topic in Sociology. Emphasis on student participation in learning. May not be repeated for credit.
SOC 191
Workshop in Contemporary Sociological Theory
SOC 100;  SOC 100 (former SOC 165A); senior standing.
Workshop in contemporary sociological theory that allows students to explore the uses of theory in empirical inquiry on problems of interest to students. Contemporary theory considered in relation to classical and modern influences, concept formation, theory construction, and explanation.
SOC 191
Workshop in Contemporary Sociological Theory
SOC 100;  SOC 100 (former SOC 165A); senior standing.
Workshop in contemporary sociological theory that allows students to explore the uses of theory in empirical inquiry on problems of interest to students. Contemporary theory considered in relation to classical and modern influences, concept formation, theory construction, and explanation.
SOC 192
Internship & Research Practicum
Consent of Instructor.  Must have 84 units complete; faculty approval of proposed internship.
Supervised internship and study in an agency, organization, or institution; application of sociological concepts to the work experience.
SOC 192
Internship & Research Practicum
Consent of Instructor.  Must have 84 units complete; faculty approval of proposed internship.
Supervised internship and study in an agency, organization, or institution; application of sociological concepts to the work experience. Maximum of 4 units may be counted toward the major.
SOC 193
Workshop in Field Research
SOC 046A;  (SOC 192 (can be concurrent) or SOC 199 (can be concurrent));  SOC 192 or SOC 199 required concurrently for 2-4 units; senior standing.
Overview of the process of collecting, recording, analyzing, and reporting qualitative social data.  Emphasis on application of principles; each participant completes an original research project.
SOC 194H
Special Study for Honors Students
Consent of Instructor.Open to Sociology majors of senior standing who qualify for the Honors program.
Independent study of a sociological problem involving the writing of an Honors thesis.
SOC 194H
Special Study for Honors Students
Consent of Instructor.Open to Sociology majors of senior standing who qualify for the Honors program.
Independent study of a sociological problem involving the writing of an Honors thesis.
SOC 194HA
Special Study for Honors Students
Senior standing and admission to the Honors Program.
Directed reading, research and writing culminating in the preparation of a Senior Honors Thesis under direction of faculty advisor.
SOC 194HB
Special Study for Honors Students
Senior standing and admissions to the Honors Program.
Directed reading, research and writing culminating in the preparation of a Senior Honors Thesis under direction of faculty advisor.
SOC 195
Special Topics in Sociological Analysis
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
In-depth examination of topics in sociology. Emphasis on student research and writing.
SOC 197T
Tutoring in Sociology 
Upper division standing; completion of appropriate course with distinction.
Activities vary depending on the nature of the course assignment. May include (but not limited to) tutoring on course material, advising on projects and papers, and leading discussion groups.
SOC 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

SOC 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.  Must have 84 units complete and faculty approval.
Special study.
SOC 201
Social Research
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Comparative survey of sociological inquiry, taught as a practicum. Philosophy of social science; values and research; research agendas and research problem formulations; research process; explanations; interpretation; study design; concept formation, measure, sampling, data acquisition, inference; rhetoric and presentation of findings.
SOC 206
Quantitative Analysis in Sociology 
SOC 106.
Survey of the statistical models and methods that serve as a foundation for quantitative research in sociology, with an emphasis on multivariate regression analysis, as well as measurement theory and time series analysis.
SOC 207A
Methods of Quantitative Research
SOC 106;  Or the equivalent.
Principles of study design, examination of measurement, survey research methods and multivariate analysis. Stresses actual practice of techniques. Carry out quantitative data analysis using packaged computer programs.
SOC 208
Topics in Advanced Quanitative Methods in Social Science
SOC 206;  Or the equivalent and graduate standing; major graduate students.
Analysis of the logic and application of an advanced statistical model; the particular model chosen may vary.  Emphasis on the model's assumptions, its strengths and weaknesses, its application for social science inquiry, and the relationship between methods and social theory.
SOC 215
Economy, Polity, & Society
Consent of Instructor.Open to graduate students in sociology & related disciplines.
Introduces students to topics and selected issues in the related fields of economic and political sociology and political economy.
SOC 220
Deviance, Law, & Social Control
SOC 120;  or Consent of Instructor.
Report and discussions of literature on selected forms of deviance in relation to law and formal social control. Agency contacts and exploratory research projects.
SOC 224
Sociology of Education
SOC 206 or equivalent recommended.Restricted to graduate students or consent of instructor.
Overview of sociological theories accounting for the form, role, and evolution of educational systems.  Emphasis on empirical research on education and social stratification and application to educational policy. 
SOC 226
Sociological Social Psychology
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Advanced study of the varying approaches, methods, issues and topical concerns of sociological social psychology. Analysis of central and representative historical and contemporary works.
SOC 234
Gender, Family, & Society
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Major theoretical traditions and concerns in family sociology and sociology of gender. Analysis of selected classical and contemporary works representative of functionalist, Marxist, psychoanalytic, feminist and critical theoretical approaches to these subjects; e.g., Engels, Parsons, Freud, Horkheimer, Goode, Lasch, Mitchell. Emphasis on macro and historical questions.
SOC 242A
Methodologies of Sociohistorical Inquires
Consent of instructor not required for graduate students in the Social Sciences Division or the Humanities, Arts, and Cultural Studies Division; required for undergraduates and students from other divisions or colleges.
Introduction to comparative and case methodological approaches to sociohistorical inquiry, theoretical and practical issues, and substantive research agendas ranging from study of large-scale social transformations to close microhistories, including research agendas being developed by students in the course.
SOC 245
Developing Societies
Graduate student status or familiarity with problems of developing societies.
Analysis of social and economic problems of developing societies from the standpoint of theory and research on modernization and underdevelopment. Nature of third world dependency and interdependence in the global political economy.
SOC 255
Sociology of Law
Consent of Instructor.
Analysis of the nature of the legal process and its impact on social behavior. Will consider (1) nature and functions of law, (2) the organization and administration of law, and (3) the capacity of law toaffect social behavior.
SOC 265B
Theory in Contemporary Sociology 
SOC 265A.
Explores the uses of theories in contemporary sociology by tracing their connections with classical sociological writings and their relations to broader theoretical concerns of contemporary social thought, with particular emphasis on relevance to the current historical, cultural and social milieu.
SOC 270
Social Demography
SOC 170;  or Consent of Instructor.
How social institutions affect and are affected by the level and variation of mortality, migration, and fertility. Special emphases on the determinants of fertility-related attitudes and behavior, on less-developed countries, and on contemporary empirical studies.
SOC 288
Integrative Research Practicum
SOC 207A;  SOC 242A;  SOC 292A;  Consent of Instructor.
Continuing training in field, quantitative, and/or comparative-historical methods. Emphasis on students' research projects and applications of principles related to research design, concept and theory construction causality and interpretation, and data and measurement. Completion of research paper is required. 
SOC 292A
Field Research
Graduate standing in Sociology or consent of instructor.
Introduction to the logic, methods, and practices of field research, with particular emphasis on the ethnographic tradition of participant observation. Interviewing and other qualitative techniques will also be covered. Students will develop original research projects based on their own fieldwork.
SOC 293
Proseminar in Sociology 
First-year Sociology graduate students only.
Introduction to graduate training in sociology. A seminar designed to introduce students entering graduate work in the department to its ongoing research activities.
SOC 295
Special Topics Seminar
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Research topics in Sociology. Specific topic will vary according to faculty interest and student demand.
SOC 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

SOC 299
Individual Study
Consent of Instructor.

SOC 390A
The Teaching of Sociology 
Graduate standing; required for first-time teaching assistants.
Practical instruction in teaching methods for qualitative and quantitative courses. Pedagogical issues involved in critical sociological analysis.
SOC 390B
The Teaching of Sociology
Graduate standing.
Practical instruction in devising course syllabi, lectures and assignments for Associate-Instructors and others interested in college teaching. Discussion of pedagogical methods of teaching qualitative and quantitative courses.
SOC 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Graduate standing.

SOC 466
Research Paper Workshop
Master of Arts standing.
A workshop to assist advanced graduate students in the preparation of an original research paper. Students present their research papers and discuss issues in theory, research design, data, empirical inference, and verbal and written presentation of a professional research paper.
SPA 002
Elementary Spanish
SPA 001 or SPA 001S or SPA 001Y;  Or the equivalent.
Continuation of SPA 001 and SPA 001S in the areas of grammar and basic language skills.
SPA 002S
Elementary Spanish
SPA 001 or SPA 001S or SPA 001Y.
Continuation of SPA 001 and SPA 001S in the areas of grammar and basic language skills. May be taught abroad in a Spanish speaking country under the supervision of UC Davis faculty/lecturer.
SPA 002V
Elementary Spanish
SPA 001 or SPA 001S or SPA 001Y;  Or the equivalent.
Continuation of SPA 001, SPA 001S, or previous high school experience in the areas of grammar and basic language skills. Online format combining synchronous chatting with technologically based materials.
SPA 002Y
Elementary Spanish
SPA 001 or SPA 001S.
Continuation of SPA 001 or SPA 001S in the areas of grammar and basic language skills. Hybrid format combining classroom instruction with technologically based materials.
SPA 003
Elementary Spanish
SPA 002 or SPA 002S or SPA 002V or SPA 002Y.
Completion of grammar sequence and continuing practice of all language skills using cultural texts. 
SPA 003S
Elementary Spanish
SPA 002 or SPA 002S or SPA 002V or SPA 002Y.
Completion of grammar sequence and continuing practice of all language skills using cultural texts. May be taught abroad in a Spanish speaking country under the supervision of UC Davis faculty.
SPA 003V
Elementary Spanish
SPA 002 or SPA 002S or SPA 002V or SPA 002Y.
Continuation of SPA 002, SPA 002S, SPA 002V or SPA 002Y. Online format combining synchronous chatting with technologically based materials.
SPA 003Y
Elementary Spanish
SPA 002 or SPA 002S or SPA 002V or SPA 002Y.
Completion of grammar sequence and continuing practice of all language skills using cultural texts. Hybrid format combining classroom instruction with technologically based materials.
SPA 008
Elementary Spanish Conversation
(SPA 003 or SPA 003V or SPA 003Y);  SPA 021 (concurrently) recommended.Not open to native speakers or upper division students.
Designed to develop oral communication skills. Emphasis on increasing vocabulary, improving listening comprehension, pronunciation, accuracy and grammar control. Practice of everyday situations.
SPA 021
Intermediate Spanish
SPA 003 or SPA 003S or SPA 003V or SPA 003Y.
Review and development of grammar, vocabulary and composition acquired in the first year through exercises and reading of modern texts. 
SPA 021S
Intermediate Spanish
SPA 003 or SPA 003S or SPA 003V or SPA 003Y.
Review and development of the grammar, vocabulary and composition acquired in the first year through exercises and reading of modern texts. May be taught abroad.
SPA 021V
Intermediate Spanish I
SPA 003 or SPA 003Y or SPA 003V;  Or the equivalent from previous high school language experience.
Continuation of SPA 003, SPA 003V, SPA 003Y, SPA 003S, or previous high school experience in the areas of grammar and intermediate language skills. Online format combining synchronous chatting with technologically based materials.
SPA 021Y
Intermediate Spanish
SPA 003 or SPA 003S or SPA 003V or SPA 003Y.
Continuation of SPA 003, SPA 003S, SPA 003V and SPA 003Y in the areas of grammar and basic language skills. Hybrid format combining classroom instruction with technologically based materials where learning takes place both face-to-face and online.
SPA 022
Intermediate Spanish 
SPA 021 or SPA 021S or SPA 021V or SPA 021Y.
Development of all language skills through exercises and reading of modern texts. Development on more difficult grammar concepts and further practice on composition. 
SPA 022S
Intermediate Spanish 
SPA 021 or SPA 021S or SPA 021V or SPA 021Y.
Development of all language skills through exercises and reading of modern texts. Development of more difficult grammar concepts and further practice on composition. May be taught abroad.
SPA 022V
Intermediate Spanish II
SPA 021 or SPA 021S or SPA 021V or SPA 021Y;  Or equivalent from previous high school language experience.
Continuation of SPA 021, SPA 021V, SPA 021Y, SPA 022S, or previous high school experience in the areas of grammar and intermediate language skills. Online format combining synchronous chatting with technologically based materials.
SPA 022Y
Intermediate Spanish
SPA 021 or SPA 021S or SPA 021V or SPA 021Y.
Continuation of SPA 021, SPA 021S, or SPA 021V in the areas of grammar and basic language skills. Online format combining synchronous chatting with technologically based materials.
SPA 023
Spanish Composition I
SPA 022 or SPA 022S or SPA 022V or SPA 022Y.
Development of writing skills by way of reading, discussion, and analysis of authentic materials, literary texts, and videos. Selective review of grammar. Composition, journals, individual and group projects.  
SPA 023S
Spanish Composition I
SPA 022 or SPA 022S or SPA 022V or SPA 022Y.
Development of writing skills by way of reading, discussion, and analysis of authentic materials, literary texts, and videos. Selective review of grammar. Composition, journals, individual and group projects. May be taught abroad in Spanish speaking country.
SPA 024
Spanish Composition II
SPA 023 or SPA 023S.
Development of advanced level writing skills, with emphasis on how to write argumentative prose, essays, and research papers. Introduction to the analysis of literary genres. Compositions, journals, individual and group projects. 
SPA 024S
Spanish Composition II
SPA 023 or SPA 023S.
Development of advanced level writing skills, with emphasis on how to write argumentative prose, essays, and research papers. Introduction to the analysis of literary genres. Compositions, journals, individual and group projects. May be taught abroad.
SPA 028
Intermediate Spanish Conversation
SPA 008 or SPA 022 or SPA 022V or SPA 022Y.
Continuation of SPA 008. Designed to develop oral communication skills at a more advanced level. Practice in more complex situations. (Former SPA 009)
SPA 031
Intermediate Spanish for Native Speakers I
SPA 003 or SPA 003V or SPA 003Y;  Or equivalent course or consent of instructor.
First course of a three-quarter series designed to provide bilingual students whose native language is Spanish with the linguistic and learning skills required for successfully completing upper division courses in Spanish. Intensive review of grammar and composition.
SPA 032
Intermediate Spanish for Native Speakers II
SPA 031;  Consent of Instructor.
Continuation of SPA 031, intensive review of grammar and composition. Development of all language skills through reading of modern texts, presentation/discussion of major ideas, vocabulary expansion, and writing essays on topics discussed. Designed for students whose native language is Spanish.
SPA 033
Intermediate Spanish for Native Speakers III
SPA 032;  Consent of Instructor.
Development of writing skills, with emphasis on experimenting with various writing styles: analytical, argumentative, and creative. Analytical review of literary genres. Written essays will be assigned. Students will develop a research paper. Designed for students whose native language is Spanish.
SPA 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of instructor and department chairperson.
Primarily for lower division students. May be taught abroad.
SPA 098F
Student Facilitated Course
Consent of Instructor.
Student facilitated course intended primarily for lower division students.
SPA 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

SPA 100
Principles of Hispanic Literature & Criticism
SPA 024 or SPA 024S or SPA 033.
Principles of literary criticism applied to the study of fiction, drama, poetry, and essay of major literary writers of the Hispanic world.  
SPA 100S
Principles of Hispanic Literature & Criticism
SPA 024 or SPA 033.
Principles of literary criticism applied to the study of fiction, drama, poetry and essay of major literary writers of the Hispanic world. May be taught abroad in a Spanish speaking country under the supervision of a UC Davis faculty/lecturer.
SPA 110
Advanced Spanish Composition
SPA 024 or SPA 033.
Practice in expository writing with emphasis on clarity and idiomatic expression. Practical application and review of selected grammar topics. (Part of former SPA 110A & SPA 110B.)
SPA 111N
The Structure of Spanish: Sounds & Words
(SPA 024 or SPA 033);  or Consent of Instructor.  LIN 001 recommended.
Linguistic description of the sound patterns of Spanish and how those sounds can be used to form larger units, such as morphemes and words. Theoretical and practical comparisons with English and with other Romance languages. (Former SPA 132.)
SPA 112N
The Structure of Spanish: Words & Phrases
SPA 111N;  or Consent of Instructor.
Study of Spanish word and phrase structure, with special emphasis on the constituent structure of noun and verb phrases. Theoretical and practical comparisons with English and with other Romance languages. (Former SPA 131.)
SPA 113
Spanish Pronunciation
(SPA 024 or SPA 033);  LIN 001 recommended.
Sound structure of modern Spanish; theoretical analysis of selected problems in pronunciation. Strongly recommended for prospective teachers of Spanish.
SPA 114N
Contrastive Analysis of English & Spanish
SPA 024 or SPA 033;  or Consent of Instructor.  SPA 111N and SPA 112N recommended.
Contrastive analysis of English and Spanish, error analysis, introduction to structuralist and transformational linguistics. Individual and group conferences. (Former SPA 137.)
SPA 115
History of the Spanish Language
SPA 024 or SPA 033;  or Consent of Instructor.  LIN 001 recommended.
Spanish language from its roots in spoken Latin to modernity. Emphasis on the close relationship between historical events and language change, and the role that literature plays in language standardization.  
SPA 115S
History of the Spanish Language
SPA 024 or SPA 033;  or Consent of Instructor.  LIN 001 recommended.
Spanish language from its roots in spoken Latin to modernity. Emphasis on the close relationship between historical events and language change, and the role that literature plays in language standardization. Taught abroad in a Spanish speaking country under the supervision of a UC Davis faculty/lecturer.
SPA 116
Applied Spanish Linguistics
SPA 024 or SPA 033;  or Consent of Instructor.  LIN 001 recommended.
Exploration of the major theoretical and practical issues concerning learning Spanish as a second language. For students interested in teaching Spanish as a career. May be taught abroad.
SPA 116S
Applied Spanish Linguistics
SPA 024 or SPA 033;  or Consent of Instructor.  LIN 001 recommended.
Exploration of the major theoretical and practical issues concerning learning Spanish as a second language. For students interested in teaching Spanish as a career. May be taught abroad in a Spanish speaking country, in Spanish, under the supervision of UC Davis faculty.
SPA 117
Teaching Spanish as a Native Tongue in the U.S.: Praxis & Theory
SPA 024 or SPA 033;  or Consent of Instructor.  LIN 001 recommended.
Designed for students interested in teaching Spanish to native speakers. Focus on cultural diversity of the Spanish speaking population in the United States; applied language teaching methodologies in the context of teaching Spanish to native speakers at different levels.
SPA 118
Topics in Spanish Linguistics
SPA 111N;  or Consent of Instructor.
Study of specialized topics in Spanish linguistics, for example: language and use; text and context; language and society; bilingualism; Spanish dialectology; syntax and semantics.
SPA 123
Creative Writing in Spanish
SPA 024 or SPA 033;  or Consent of Instructor.
Intensive writing of poetry or fiction in Spanish or in a bilingual (Spanish/English) format. Students will write both in prescribed forms and in experimental forms of their own choosing.
SPA 130
Survey of Spanish Literature to 1700
SPA 100 or SPA 100S or SPA 141 or SPA 141S or SPA 170 or SPA 170S.
Survey of Spanish literature (narrative, poetry and drama) to 1700, Emphasis on the multicultural birth of the Spanish culture, the formation and growth of the Spanish language and letters through its written records and the literature of the early period.
SPA 131N
Survey of Spanish Literature: 1700 to Present
SPA 100 or SPA 100S or SPA 141 or SPA 141S or SPA 170 or SPA 170S.
Survey of modern Spanish literature, providing an overview of main literary movements (romanticism, realism, naturalism, modernism, avantgarde). Emphasis on the philosophical and historical background and on the European context for modern Spanish literature. (Part of former SPA 104A & SPA 104B.)
SPA 132
Golden Age Drama & Performance
SPA 100 or SPA 100S or SPA 141 or SPA 141S or SPA 170 or SPA 170S.Limited enrollment.
Golden Age drama: text and performance. Study of Spanish Baroque drama as performance art. Close reading of plays and related aspects of 17th-century theater: theatrical spaces, staging, performance, actors, public, language, costumes. Final project is performance of a play.
SPA 133N
Golden Age Literature of Spain
SPA 100 or SPA 100S or SPA 141 or SPA 141S or SPA 170 or SPA 170S.
Introduction to the study of the principal authors and literary movements of 16th- and 17th-century Spain and Spanish American colonial literature. 
SPA 134A
Don Quijote I 
SPA 100 or SPA 100S or SPA 141 or SPA 141S or SPA 170 or SPA 170S.
Critical interpretation of Don Quijote Part One by Cervantes.  Focused study of key elements within the socio-cultural context of Golden Age Spain.  Don Quijote as prototype for the modern novel.  
SPA 134B
Don Quijote II
SPA 134A.
Critical interpretation of Don Quijote Part Two by Cervantes.  Focused study of key elements within the socio-cultural context of Golden Age Spain.  Don Quijote as prototype for the modern novel.   
SPA 135N
Spanish Romanticism
SPA 100 or SPA 100S or SPA 141 or SPA 141S or SPA 170 or SPA 170S.
Romanticism as a philosophical concept, and as a literary movement in Spain, with emphasis on its distinctive, specific "romantic" qualities and its literary expression in five leading authors of the early-19th century. (Former SPA 114.)
SPA 136N
The Spanish Novel of the 19th Century
SPA 100 or SPA 100S or SPA 141 or SPA 141S or SPA 170 or SPA 170S.
Literary realism in Spain, focusing on Leopoldo Alas (Clarn), Emilia Pardo Bazn and Benito Prez Galds unique characteristics of Spanish realism and its historical roots in Cervantes and the picaresque.
SPA 137N
20th-Century Spanish Fiction 
SPA 100 or SPA 100S or SPA 141 or SPA 141S or SPA 170 or SPA 170S.
Study of the main literary trends and authors of the modern Spanish novel and short story. Selected works by Unamuno, Valle-Incln, Sender, Cela, Matute, Ayala and others. 
SPA 138N
Modern & Contemporary Spanish Poetry
SPA 100 or SPA 100S or SPA 141 or SPA 141S or SPA 170 or SPA 170S.
Study of the main literary trends and authors of modern and contemporary Spanish poetry. Selected works by Machado, Juan Ramn Jimnez, Garca Lorca, Guilln, Aleixandre, Hernndez Hierro and others. Offered in alternate years. (Former SPA 120C.)
SPA 139
Modern Spanish Theater
SPA 100 or SPA 100S or SPA 141 or SPA 141S or SPA 170 or SPA 170S.
Study of the main dramatic trends and playwrights of modern Spanish theater. Selected works by Valle Incln, Garca-Lorca, Mihura, Buero-Vallejo, Arrabal and others. Offered in alternate years. 
SPA 140N
Modern Spanish Essay
SPA 100 or SPA 100S or SPA 141 or SPA 141S or SPA 170 or SPA 170S.
Ortega, Unamuno and the modern Spanish essay. Their concept of Spain and their relations with other movements and thinkers.
SPA 141
Introduction to Spanish Culture
SPA 024 or SPA 024S or SPA 033.
Introduction to history, geography and culture of Spain. Art, history of ideas, and everyday cultural manifestations.  Introduction to critical reading and textual analysis.
SPA 141S
Introduction to Spanish Culture
SPA 024 or SPA 024S or SPA 033.
Introduction to history, geography and culture of Spain. Art, history of ideas, and everyday cultural manifestations. Introduction to critical reading and textual analysis. May be taught abroad in a Spanish speaking country under the supervision of UC Davis faculty.
SPA 142
Special Topics in Spanish Cultural & Literary Studies
SPA 100 or SPA 100S or SPA 141 or SPA 141S or SPA 170 or SPA 170S.
Special topics in the study of Spanish literature and culture. May be taught abroad.
SPA 144
Topics in Spanish Cultural Studies
SPA 024 or SPA 024S or SPA 033.
Study of specific historical tendencies in Spanish culture(s) from the Romans to the present.  Sources studied may include literature, film, art, journalism, and performance.  Approaches to material may address issues of aesthetics, politics, identity, and globalization.
SPA 148
Cinema in the Spanish-Speaking World in Translation
SPA 024 or SPA 024S or SPA 033.
Analysis of the culture of the Spanish-speaking world through film in translation.  Emphasis on the cultural information illustrated by the films; no prior knowledge of cinematography required.  Films with subtitles.  
SPA 148S
Cinema in the Spanish-Speaking World in Translation
SPA 024 or SPA 033.
Analysis of the culture of the Spanish-speaking world through film in translation. Emphasis on the cultural information illustrated by the films; no prior knowledge of cinematography required. Films with subtitles. May be taught abroad in a Spanish speaking country, in Spanish, under the supervision of UC Davis faculty.
SPA 149
Latin-American Literature in Translation
ENL 003;  Or the equivalent of ENL 003.
Reading, lectures and discussions in English of works by Borges, Cortzar, Fuentes, Garca Mrquez, Paz and others. May not be counted toward the major in Spanish.
SPA 150N
Survey of Latin American Literature to 1900
SPA 100 or SPA 100S or SPA 141 or SPA 141S or SPA 170 or SPA 170S.
Latin American literature from preconquest texts and the chronicles of the Conquest to romanticism and modernism. Reading selections include fiction, poetry, drama and essays.
SPA 151
Survey of Latin American Literature 1900 to Present
SPA 100 or SPA 100S or SPA 141 or SPA 141S or SPA 170 or SPA 170S.
Latin American literature from 1900 to the present. Reading selections include fiction, poetry, drama, essays, testimonio, etc. 
SPA 153
Latin American Short Story
SPA 100 or SPA 100S or SPA 141 or SPA 141S or SPA 170 or SPA 170S.
Evolution of the Latin American short story from the 19th century to the present. Emphasis on the contemporary period. 
SPA 154
Latin American Novel
SPA 100 or SPA 100S or SPA 141 or SPA 141S or SPA 170 or SPA 170S.
Evolution of the Latin American novel from the 19th century to the present. Emphasis on significant contemporary works. 
SPA 155
Mexican Novel
SPA 100 or SPA 100S or SPA 141 or SPA 141S or SPA 170 or SPA 170S.
Evolution of the Mexican novel from the 19th century to the present. Emphasis on the narrative of the Revolution and significant contemporaryworks. 
SPA 156
Latin American Literature of the Turn of the 20th Century
SPA 100 or SPA 100S or SPA 141 or SPA 141S or SPA 170 or SPA 170S.
Modernism as an authentic expression of Latin American literature and its influence on 20th-century poetry and prose. In depth analysis of the works of Daro and other major writers of the era. Offered in alternate years. 
SPA 157
Great Works of Latin American Literature/Culture
SPA 100 or SPA 100S or SPA 141 or SPA 141S or SPA 170 or SPA 170S.
Study of major works of Latin American literature/culture and their cultural and literary milieus. May include novels, poetry, film, etc.  Works may be analyzed in terms of style, influence, cultural significance, political importance, and/or commercial success.
SPA 158
Latin American Poetry: From Vanguardism to Surrealism & Beyond
SPA 100 or SPA 100S or SPA 141 or SPA 141S or SPA 170 or SPA 170S.
Study of vanguardism, surrealism, and more recent movements of Latin American poetry. An in-depth analysis of the works of such major poets as Neruda, Vallejo, and Paz.
SPA 159
Special Topics in Latin American Literature & Culture
SPA 100 or SPA 100S or SPA 141 or SPA 141S or SPA 170 or SPA 170S.
Special topics in the study of Latin American literature and culture.  
SPA 159S
Special Topics in Latin American Literature & Culture
SPA 100 or SPA 100S or SPA 141 or SPA 141S or SPA 170 or SPA 170S.
Special topics in the study of Latin American literature and culture. May be taught abroad in a Spanish speaking country under the supervision of UC Davis faculty. 
SPA 159Y
Special Topics in Latin American Literature & Culture
SPA 100 or SPA 100S or SPA 141 or SPA 141S or SPA 170 or SPA 170S.
Special topics in the study of Latin American literature and culture. Hybrid format combining classroom instruction with technologically based materials.
SPA 160
Latin American Women Writers in Translation
Upper division standing or consent of instructor.
Latin American women writers from the 19th and 20th centuries. Recent theoretical approaches to literature by women in Latin America. Discussions in English of works by Matto de Turner, Avellaneda, Storni, Ocampo, Agustini, Mistral, Castellanos, and others.
SPA 168
 Introduction to Latinx Culture
SPA 024 or SPA 024S or SPA 033;  or Consent of Instructor.
Introduction to histories and cultures of Latinx (Mexican American, Puerto Rican, Salvadoran American, Ecuadorian American, etc.) populations of the US. Multiple genres of cultural production and representation, with a focus on cultural diversity and regional difference. Introduction to critical analysis across multiple genres of cultural production (literature, visual culture, media culture, etc.).
SPA 169
Special Topics in Chicanx/Latinx Studies
SPA 024 or SPA 024S or SPA 033;  or Consent of Instructor.
Special topics in the study of Chicanx and/or Latinx literature and culture.
SPA 170
Introduction to Latin American Culture
SPA 024 or SPA 024S or SPA 033.
Introduction to history, geography and culture of Latin America. Multiple genres of cultural production and representation, with a focus on cultural diversity and regional difference. Introduction to critical reading and textual analysis.
SPA 170S
Introduction to Latin American Culture
SPA 024 or SPA 024S or SPA 033.
Introduction to history, geography and culture of Latin America. Multiple genres of cultural production and representation, with a focus on cultural diversity and regional difference. Introduction to critical reading and textual analysis. May be taught abroad in a Spanish-speaking country.
SPA 171
Music from Latin America
Consent of Instructor.
Examination of music from Latin America. Characteristic music (i.e. tango, bossa nova, salsa, musica motena, musica andina) as well as its implications in other musical genres. Taught in English or Spanish depending on instructor.
SPA 171S
Music from Latin America
Consent of Instructor.
Examination of music from Latin America. Characteristic music (i.e. tango, bossa nova, salsa, musica motena, musica andina) as well as its implications in other musical genres. May be taught abroad in English or Spanish depending on instructor.  
SPA 172
Mexican Culture
SPA 024 or SPA 024S or SPA 033.
Study of Mexican culture through a diversity of cultural expression, including elite, popular and mass media culture.  Focus on national icons and archetypes, multiculturalism, transnationalism.
SPA 173
Cinema & Latin American Culture
SPA 024 or SPA 024S or SPA 033.
Understanding Latin American cultures through cinema. History and critical analysis of Latin American film. Focus on a national cinematic tradition. Comparative experiences in different parts of Latin America and/or a particular era. Conducted entirely in Spanish.
SPA 174
Chicano Culture
SPA 024 or SPA 033.
Interdisciplinary survey of Chicano culture. Topics include literature, art, folklore, oral tradition, music, politics, as well aseveryday cultural manifestations. Conducted in Spanish. (Former SPA 124.)
SPA 175
Topics in Latin American Cultural Studies
SPA 024 or SPA 024S or SPA 033.
Specific historical tendencies and issues in Latin American culture(s) from precolombian times to present. Studies of literature, film, art, journalism and performance. Focus on issues of aesthetics, politics, identity, and globalization. May be taught abroad.
SPA 176
Literature in Spanish Written in the United States
SPA 024 or SPA 033.
Survey of the literary and cultural contributions of the main Spanish-speaking populations present in the U.S.: Chicanos, Puerto Ricans, Cuban-Americans, Central Americans, and other Latinos.
SPA 177
California & Latin America
SPA 024 or SPA 024S or SPA 033.
Interdisciplinary survey on the relationship between California and Latin America (1500s-present). Latin American representations of California and Californian representations of Latin America, as well as borderlands texts, with a special focus on Mexican-American perspectives. Conducted in Spanish.
SPA 178A
Spanish for the Professions
SPA 024 or SPA 024S or SPA 033.
For students with an advanced level of Spanish interested in the use of Spanish in the health care, legal and law enforcement and marketing and business professions.  Field trips documenting the use of Spanish in the public context.
SPA 180
Senior Seminar in Spanish Linguistics
Senior standing; a major in Spanish or consent of instructor.Limited enrollment.
Group study of a special topic drawn from Spanish linguistics. Independent research project.
SPA 181
Senior Seminar in Spanish Literature/Culture
Senior standing; a major in Spanish or consent of instructor.Limited enrollment.
Group study of a special topic drawn from Spanish literary or cultural studies. Independent research project.
SPA 182
Senior Seminar in Latin American Literature/Culture
Senior standing; a major in Spanish or consent of instructor.Limited enrollment.
Group study of a special topic drawn from Latin American literary or cultural studies. Independent research project.
SPA 192I
Internship in Spanish
SPA 023;  and Consent of Instructor.  Junior standing; major in Spanish, Chicano Studies, or a related field.
Internships in fields where Spanish language skills can be used and perfected (teaching, counseling, translating-interpreting). May be taught abroad.
SPA 194H
Special Study for Honors Students
Consent of Instructor.  Senior standing and qualificaiton for the Spanish honors program.
Guided research, under the direction of a faculty member, leading to a senior honors thesis on a topic in Spanish literature, civilization, or language studies.  
SPA 197T
Tutoring in Spanish
Upper division standing and permission of the chair.
Tutoring in undergraduate courses including leadership in small voluntary discussion groups affiliated with departmental courses.
SPA 197TC
Tutoring in the Community
Upper division standing and permission of the chair.
Tutoring in public schools under the guidance of a regular teacher and supervision by a departmental faculty member.
SPA 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of instructor and department chairperson.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.
SPA 198F
Student Faciliated Course
Consent of Instructor.
Student facilitated course intended primarily for upper division students.
SPA 199FA
Student Facilitated Course Development
Consent of Instructor.Open to upper division Spanish majors only.
Under the supervision of a faculty member, an undergraduate student plans and develops the course they will offer under 098F/198F.
SPA 199FB
Student Facilitated Teaching
SPA 199FA;  Consent of Instructor.Must have completed SPA 199FA, and be teaching a SPA 098F or SPA 198F; open to upper division Spanish majors only.
Student-facilitated course under the supervision of a faculty member, an undergraduate student teaches a course under 098F/198F.
SPA 201
Literary Theory I
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Basic theories and practical approaches to modern and contemporary Hispanic literature. Emphasis on formalism, poststructuralism, socio-cultural discourses, and ideologies.
SPA 202
Literary Theory II
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Major contemporary critical theories including recent, innovative approaches to Hispanic literature and culture. Readings from Semiotics and Deconstructionism to Psychological and Socio-ideological approaches. Emphasis on Postmodern and Neo-colonial discourse.
SPA 205
Spanish Phonology 
Some knowledge of phonetics is required and consent of instructor; LIN 109 and LIN 139 highly recommended.
Analyzes the sound patterns of Spanish from both linear and non-linear perspectives. Students will develop a clear understanding of what phonology is and the nature of Spanish phonology, as defined by modern linguistic analysis.
SPA 206
Spanish Syntax
LIN 165;  LIN 140.
An examination of Spanish word order within the framework of general linguistic theory. The student will investigate how to write a grammarof Spanish with particular attention to the structure of noun and verb clauses.
SPA 207
History of the Spanish Language
LAT 001.
History of the Spanish language. (Former SPA 220A.)
SPA 208
Old Spanish Texts
SPA 207.
An in-depth linguistic examination of Old Spanish texts from the 12th to the 15th centuries, with particular attention to the significance of orthographic changes.
SPA 211
Hispanic Dialectology
SPA 220;  or Consent of Instructor.
Descriptive and historical study of the distinctive features of Peninsular and American Spanish dialects. (Former SPA 221.)
SPA 212
Applied Linguistics
Graduate standing and SPA 215 and SPA 216 recommended.
Focuses on the relevant linguistic aspects of teaching Spanish. Designed for graduate students who have an interest in second-language learningand teaching.
SPA 215
Special Topics in Hispanic Linguistics
Consent of Instructor.  SPA 205 and SPA 206 recommended.
Specialized topics in Hispanic linguistics (e.g., pragmatics, sociolinguistics, topics in syntax, semantics, or diachronic studies). May be repeated for credit when topic differs.
SPA 220
Catalan Language & Culture
Consent of Instructor.  Good command of Spanish, Portuguese, French or Italian and graduate level of studies in any of these languages.Open to advanced undergraduate students, with notions of Catalan, can be admitted with consent of instructor; designed for graduate students.
Foundation for the acquisition of Catalan oral, reading and elementary writing level skills for students of Spanish (Iberianists or Hispanists), with the capacity to interpret educated written language. Emphasis on weekly review of grammar and all language skills.
SPA 222
Critical Approaches to Spanish Literature I: Prose & Essay
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Critical approaches to Spanish narrative and essay.
SPA 223
Critical Approaches to Spanish Literature II: Poetry & Drama
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Critical approaches to Spanish poetry and drama.
SPA 224
Studies of a Major Writer, Period, or Genre in Spanish Literature
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Artistic development of a major Spanish writer and his/her intellectual and literary milieu or study of a special topic, period, or genre. May be repeated for credit with consent of instructor.
SPA 252
Medieval Spanish Literature: Prose
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
An exploration of the major genres of Medieval Spanish prose from its origins to 1450.
SPA 253
Medieval Spanish Literature: Epic
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Medieval Spanish epic narratives. Major theoretical perspectives on the genesis, diffusion, and character of the Medieval epic. Relationship of epic to ballad literature.
SPA 254
Medieval Hispanic Lyric
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Analysis of the most representative lyric poetry in the various Peninsular languages and in provencal, troubadour poetry, kharjas, villancicos, cantigas de amigo, and courtly lyric.
SPA 256
Spanish Literature of the Renaissance & Golden Age: Poetry
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Extensive critical study of the main currents of Renaissance and Baroque Spanish poetry through its language structures, styles (Culteranismo-Conceptismo), rhetorical devices, myths, and themes (love, death, time).
SPA 257
Spanish Literature of the Renaissance & Golden Age: Drama
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Exploration of major 16th and 17th century literary and cultural developments through the study of selected dramas.
SPA 258
Spanish Literature of the Renaissance & Golden Age: Prose
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Origins and development of the Spanish novel during the Renaissance and the Spanish Golden Age.
SPA 259
Cervantes & the Novel
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Narrative works of Miguel de Cervantes with special emphasis on Don Quijote.
SPA 260
Modern Spanish Literature
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Topics of Spanish literature, from 1700-1920.
SPA 261
Contemporary Spanish Literature: Poetry
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Critical analysis of modern Spanish poetry from a wide spectrum of poetic currents.
SPA 262
Contemporary Spanish Literature: Narrative
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Study of the 20th-century novel and short story with emphasis on the avant-garde, existentialism, social realism, and postmodern trends. 
SPA 263
Contemporary Spanish Literature: Drama
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
The Spanish theatrical production of the last 70 years.
SPA 264
Contemporary Spanish Literature: Essay
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Major thinkers from Ganivet to Unamuno and Ortega y Gassett. Emphasis will be placed on the relationships between Spanish thought and European philosophical currents.
SPA 265
Women Writers of Spain
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Introduction to the development of a feminine consciousness in the Spanish contemporary literary scene. Selected texts represent particularly innovative typologies of feminine discourse in the realm of the historical, psychoanalytical, and metafictional, erotic, and allegorical fiction.
SPA 272
Critical Approaches to Latin American Literature: Narrative
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Development of Latin American literary periods and currents in narrative (novel, short story, and essay), from early colonial times to the present.  
SPA 273
Critical Approaches to Latin American Literature: Poetry & Drama
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Development of Latin American literary periods and currents in poetry and drama, from early Colonial times to the present.  
SPA 274
Studies of a Major Writer, Period, or Genre in Latin American Literature
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Artistic development of a major Latin American writer and his/her intellectual and literary milieu or study of a special topic, period, or genre.
SPA 275
Colonial Literature
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
An examination of pre-Hispanic and Colonial narrative, poetry and theatre. Emphasis on historical, anthropological, and ethnographic approaches to Colonial discourse.
SPA 276
20th-Century Latin American Drama
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Major Latin American dramatists from Florencio Snchez to the present. (Former SPA 240.)
SPA 277
Latin American Novel, 1900-1950
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Study of main trends and key authors in Latin America in the first half of the 20th century. (Former SPA 241A.)
SPA 278
New Trends in Latin American Fiction
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Recent developments in Latin American narrative. Emphasis on innovative language and structure. (Former SPA 241B.)
SPA 279
Mexican Narrative
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Study of the evolution of Mexican narrative. Emphasis on the narrativeof the Revolution and significant contemporary works.
SPA 281
Latin American Women Writers
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Study of feminist critical theories, gender construction, and self-representation within the history of socio-cultural changes in Latin America.
SPA 282
Daro & Modernism
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Study of poetry and prose of Spanish-American Modernism (1880-1916). (Former SPA 245.) Offered in alternate years.
SPA 285
Multicultural Approaches to Cuban Literature & Culture
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Study of main trends in Cuban literature. Emphasis on historical, geographic, social and cultural context (including music and film). Taught in English; some readings in Spanish.
SPA 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

SPA 300
The Teaching of Spanish
Senior or graduate standing; a major or minor in Spanish.

SPA 390
The Teaching of Spanish in College
Graduate standing.
Theoretical instruction in modern teaching methods and demonstration of their practical application. Required of graduate teaching assistants.
SPA 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Graduate standing.

SPH 092
Internship in Community Health
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.
Students apply theory and concepts learned in the classroom through field work in a community health agency.
SPH 101
Introduction to Public Health
Undergraduate standing.
Provide basic concepts and controversies in public health, basic science of public health, social and behavioral factors in health and disease, environmental and occupational health issues, the relationship of public health to the medical care system and health care reform.
SPH 161
Campus Alcohol/Other Drug Abuse Prevention Program Peer Educator Training
SPH 160 (can be concurrent);  and Consent of Instructor.
Preparation for internship in campus and community substance abuse prevention and educational intervention. Addiction and other physiological responses to alcohol and other drugs. Harm-reduction strategies for individuals and target populations. Practice in peer counseling skills and outreach presentations to groups.
SPH 162
Health Advocates Peer Educator Training
SPH 160 (can be concurrent);  and Consent of Instructor.
Preparation for internship in campus and community health promotion and risk reduction. Nutrition, stress management, physical fitness, body image and disordered eating, skin cancer prevention, and other general wellness/health promotion topics.
SPH 190
Topics in Public Health
Consent of Instructor.Pass one restricted to undergraduate seniors. 
Seminar on key issues and current topics in public health. 
SPH 190C
Research Conference in Community & International Health
Consent of Instructor.
Weekly conference on research problems, progress, and techniques in Community and International Health. Critical discussion of recent journal articles.
SPH 192
Internship in Community Health Practice
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division and graduate students.
The student, through fieldwork in a community health agency, learns to apply theory and concepts learned in the classroom.
SPH 198
Study in Community & International Health
Consent of Instructor.  Undergraduate standing.
Study and experience for undergraduate students in any number of areas in community and international health.
SPH 199
Research in Community & International Health
Consent of Instructor.  Undergraduate standing.
Student will work with faculty member in areas of research interest, including but not limited to injury control, international health, health policy, occupational and environmental health, health promotion and wellness, women's health, and health demographics.
SPH 201
Introduction to Public Health
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Provides an overview of public health. Covers the history of public health in the U.S.; defines its major functions and constituencies; and, introduces fundamental principles of epidemiology, biostatistics, behavioral sciences, environmental health, infectious diseases, and reducing health disparities.
SPH 202
Public Health Issues in California's Central Valley 
Consent of Instructor.
Public health issues in Californias Central Valley, including the influences of  migration, racial and ethnic diversity, the agricultural industry, environmental exposures, and rurality. 
SPH 203
Learning & Teaching in Public Health Contexts 
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Aimed at current and future public health professionals interested in learning more about the educational potential for interactions with community members and other health professionalsall stakeholders in improving the health of communities.
SPH 205AY
Epidemiology for Health Professionals
Consent of Instructor.
Basic epidemiologic concepts and approaches to epidemiologic research, with examples from  human medicine, including outbreak investigation, infectious disease epidemiology, properties of tests. 
SPH 207
Advanced Epidemiologic Methodology
EPI 206.
In-depth integration of advanced epidemiological concepts. Theory, methods, and applications for observational studies including random and systematic error, confounding, counterfactuals, causal inference, effect modification, internal and external validity, estimability, and interpretation of effect measures, and advanced study designs.
SPH 208
Principles & Applications of Cancer Prevention & Control
Consent of Instructor.
Principles and applications of cancer prevention and control from a public health perspective.
SPH 210
Public Health Informatics
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Collection, verification, and utilization of data related to populations; infrastructure, functions, and tools used to generate public health knowledge supporting public health practices and policy development/dissemination.
SPH 212
Migration & Health
Graduate standing.
Principles of migration and health. Topics will include demographics, public health invention programs, health care delivery, occupational health, and effects of international migration on the health in communities of origin, transit and destination. Guest presentations by outside experts.
SPH 213
Health Disparities in the U.S.
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to Graduate Students. 
Introduction to the principles and practice of health disparities research.
SPH 222
Social & Behavioral Aspects of Public Health
STA 102;  STA 106;  and Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Theories and strategies of health behavior change at the individual, group, community, and environmental levels. Examples include: transtheoretical model, social networks, and social marketing. Theories are applied to solve common public health problems (cancer, obesity, smoking, and HIV/AIDS).
SPH 223
Obesity Prevention in Community Settings
Consent of Instructor.
Look at causes of the obesity epidemic in the U.S.; identify and critically assess the research literature on various prevention strategies; understand, and apply evidence-based public health strategies to combat obesity; and translate the science to a general audience. 
SPH 232
Health Communication
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Health communication theories and research traditions. Topics include consumer health information seeking; physician-patient interaction; information, social marketing, edutainment, and media advocacy campaigns;  social networks and coping; media influences on health; and new communication technologies in health promotion and healthcare delivery.
SPH 235
Health Communication Campaigns
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to graduate students.
Principles of health communication campaign planning, implementation and evaluation. Strategies for changing health behaviors, shaping policy, and improving healthcare organizations relations with stakeholders.)
SPH 245
Biostatistics for Biomedical Science 
CLH 244 or SPH 244;  and Consent of Instructor.  Or an equivalent course.
Analysis of data and design of experiments for laboratory data.
SPH 246
Biostatistics for Clinical Research
SPH 245 or CLH 245.
Emphasizes critical biostatistics for clinical research and targets biomedical audience. Students will develop understanding for basic planning and analysis of clinical studies and learn to develop collaborations with biostatisticians.
SPH 247
Statistical Analysis for Laboratory Data
CLH 245 or SPH 245.
Statistical methods for experimental design and analysis of laboratory data including gene expression arrays, RNA-Seq, and mass spec.
SPH 252
Social Epidemiology
EPI 205A;  and Consent of Instructor.
Social determinants of health; psychosocial and physiological pathways; health and social inequality; gender and racial/ethnic disparities in health; social support, social cohesion and health; social gradient in behavioral risk factors; social ecological approaches to health intervention; interventions addressing social determinants.
SPH 255
Human Reproductive Epidemiology
MPM 405;  MPM 406; PHY 220; PGG 222; or equivalents or Consent of Instructor.
Human reproductive effects and risk of reproductive disorders, examined from macro- and micro-environmental exposures in community and occupational settings, epidemiologic study designs and analyses.
SPH 262
Principles of Environmental Health Science
Consent of Instructor.
Principles, approaches and issues related to environmental health.  Recognizing, assessing, understanding and controlling the impact of people on their environment and the impact of the environment on the public.
SPH 264
Public Health Econometrics
Consent of Instructor.
Principles of demand and supply; elasticity; benefits and costs; least squares regression; stepwise regression; economic and statistical significance; fixed and random effects; longitudinal data; non-linear relations; continuous and binary variables; instrumental variables; attrition bias; tobit regression; Two-part cost model.
SPH 266
Applied Analytic Epidemiology
MPM 404;  or Consent of Instructor.
Principles and applications in analysis of epidemiologic data. Methods of analyzing stratified and matched data, logistic regression for cohort and case-control studies, Poisson regression, survival-time methods.
SPH 273
Health Services Administration
Consent of Instructor.Limited enrollment.
Structure and function of public and private medical care. Topics include categories and trends in national medical spending, predictors of patient use, causes of death, managed care, HMOs, Medicare, Medicaid, costs of technology, and medical care in other countries.
SPH 274
Economic Evaluation in Health Care 
At least one semester of graduate level Statistics or consent of instructor.
Cost-effectiveness/cost-benefit analysis (CE/CBA) methods among various economic evaluation methods. CE/CBA is increasingly used to evaluate alternative choices in public health and clinical practice and to enlighten and inform health policy determinations.
SPH 277
Net Benefit Regression 
STA 100 or SPH 244 or MPM 202;  or Consent of Instructor.  Graduate student standing.Open to graduate students only.
Uses regression methods for cost-effectiveness analysis.  Focus on methods that create and explain economic information in person-level data.  
SPH 280
Introduction to SAS Programming
Introductory statistics course; e.g., MPM 402, STA 102.
Introduction to SAS, an integrated software system for data retrieval and management, data manipulation and programming.
SPH 281
Data Management in SAS
Consent of Instructor.
SAS programming for graduate students in the public health sciences or other fields who plan to use SAS software for data analysis. 
SPH 290
Topics in Public Health
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to Graduate Students.
Key issues and current topics in public health. Begins in August summer session II. Must enroll in August, then Fall and Winter. Course is a series but grades and units are given at end of each quarter.
SPH 291
Public Health Sciences Doctoral Seminar
Consent of Instructor.
Seminar to explore research on translational science and rural health; includes presentations of student research in progress.
SPH 292A
Public Health Translational Science Rotation
Ph.D. student in Public Health Sciences or consent of instructor.
Public Health Translational Science Rotation for Ph.D. students in Public Health Sciences. 
SPH 292B
Public Health Translational Science Rotation
Consent of Instructor.Open to Ph.D. students in Public Health Sciences.
Public Health Translational Science Rotation for Ph.D. students in Public Health Sciences. 
SPH 295
International Health
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Forum for learning health issues and health care systems in other countries. Topics include health care for refugees, the impact of political strife on health, the health care professional in international settings.  
SPH 297
Public Health Practicum
Consent of Instructor.  Open to Master of Public Health students.
Practical fieldwork experience in public health.  Placement site will vary based on the interest and experience of each student.
SPH 298
Study in Community & International Health
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate student in good academic standing.
Study and experience for graduate students in any number of areas in community and international health.
SPH 299
Research in Community & International Health
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Work with faculty member in areas of research interest, including but not limited to injury control, international health, health policy, occupational and environmental health, health promotion and wellness, women's health, and health demographics.
SPH 402
Introductory Medical Spanish
Medical student or consent of instructor.
The vocabulary needed to conduct a basic history and physical examination in Spanish.
SPH 461
Clerkship in Community Health Group Practice
Third-or fourth-year medical student.
Overview of local community health in group practice situations. Students participate in treatment at several clinic sites in Yolo County. Topics include primary care, environmental health, maternal and child health, jail health, and preventive health care for the aged.
SPH 465
Community Health Preceptorship
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year medical student in good academic standing.
Participate at state or county health department or other public health organization in on-going investigations into current public health problems, e.g., birth defects, cancer control, diabetes, hypertension, injury control, infectious diseases, aging, Alzheimer's disease, and smoking and tobacco use control.
SPH 466
Occupational & Environmental Medicine Elective
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year medical student in good academic standing.
Participate in activities of Occupational and Environmental Health Unit. Major activity is involvement in an epidemiologic research project of the University. Participate in Occupational and Environmental Medicine Clinic at UC Davis Medical Center and other sites, as arranged.
SPH 470
Clinical Selective in Occupational & Environmental Medicine
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year medical student in good academic standing.
Outpatient clinical experience in Occupational and Environmental Medicine at UCDMC and other sites, as arranged. Gain experience in evaluating occ/env medical conditions, use of medical literature resources, the worker's compensation system, and toxicological principles.
SPH 480
Insights in Occupational & Environmental Medicine
Consent of Instructor.  First- or second-year medical student in good academic standing.
Observe and participate in research and clinical activities in occupational and environmental medicine which include conferences, occupational and environmental medicine clinical activities and field visits. Develop and present small individual research projects.
SPH 495
International Health
Consent of Instructor.  Medical student in good academic standing.
Forum for learning health issues and health care systems in other countries.  Topics include health care for refugees, the impact of political strife on health, the health care professional in international settings.
SPH 498
Study in Public Health Sciences
Consent of Instructor.  Medical student in good academic standing.
Study and experience for medical students in areas in community and international health.
SPH 499
Research in Public Health Sciences
Medical students with consent of instructor.
Work with faculty member in areas of research interest, including but not limited to public health, injury control, international health, health policy, occupational and environmental health, health promotion and wellness, women's health, and health demographics.
SSC 092
Soil Science Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.
Work experience off and on campus in soil science. Internship supervisedby a member of the faculty.
SSC 100
Principles of Soil Science
College-level courses in each of chemistry, physics, biology, and geology recommended.
Soil as part of natural and managed ecosystems and landscapes. Solid, liquid, and gas phases and their interactions in the soil. Water, gas and heat movement in soil. Soil biology. Plant nutrient acquisition and use.Soil development, management and use.
SSC 102
Environmental Soil Chemistry
General chemistry; SSC 100 or equivalent recommended.
Soil chemistry processes related to the fate and transport of contaminants in soil. Soil minerals, natural organic matter, surface charge, soil solution chemistry, redox reactions in soil, and sorption of inorganic and organic contaminants. 
SSC 105
Field Studies of Soils in California Ecosystems
SSC 100 and SSC 120 or equivalent recommended.Limited to a minimum of 10 students; maximum of 24.
Field-based studies of soils in California ecosystems, away from campus, throughout California. Emphasis on description and classification of soils; relationships among soils, vegetation, geology, and climate; physical, chemical, and biological processes in soils on the landscape; and the role of soils in land use. 
SSC 107
Soil Physics
SSC 100;  ERS 100;  MAT 016A;  Or the equivalent of MAT 016A.
Physical properties of soil. Principles of water, gas, heat, and solute movement in soil with selected examples related to soil and water management. Influence of soil properties on transfer processes.
SSC 109
Sustainable Nutrient  Management
SSC 100;  Or the equivalent.
Availability of nutrients in organic and conventional agricultural, vineyard, orchard and plantation forest soils; management of fertilizers, cover crops, compost, sewage sludge and manures for crop production and to prevent loss to the environment is emphasized.
SSC 111
Soil Microbiology
BIS 002C recommended.
Major groups of microorganisms in soil, their interrelationships, and their responses to environmental variables. Role of microorganisms in cycling of nutrients. Plant-microbe relationships. Transformations of organic and inorganic pollutants.
SSC 112
Soil Ecology 
SSC 100 or equivalent recommended.
Overview of living constituents of soils, their interactions, importance to, and impact on biogeochemical cycles, decomposition, and soil properties. Practical applications of soil biological diversity are emphasized.
SSC 118
Soils in Land Use & the Environment
Consent of Instructor.  SSC 100 or equivalent recommended.
Soils are considered as elements in land use planning and environmental quality. Topics include: soil survey reports, remote sensing, land capability classification, soil erosion/conservation, waste disposal on soils and soil reclamation. One one-day field trip.
SSC 120
Soil Genesis, Morphology, & Classification
SSC 100;  GEL 050 recommended.
Recognition and description of soils; chemical, biological and physical processes of soil formation. Factors of soil formation. Interactions of soils with diverse ecosystems. Introduction to soil classification. Practice using soil taxonomy. Practical experience describing soil properties in the field.
SSC 192
Soil Science Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of 84 units.
Work experience off and on campus in soil science. Internship supervisedby a member of the faculty.
SSC 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

SSC 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

SSC 202
Topics in Advanced Soil Chemistry 
Consent of Instructor.  General chemistry; SSC 100 or equivalent recommended.Restricted to 18 students.
Reviews of current research in soil chemistry. Topics include double layer theory; clay mineral and oxide surface chemistry; adsorption on soil surfaces; speciation and modeling of solution ions; solubility and mineral stability diagrams. 
SSC 205
Field Studies of Soils in California Ecosystems
SSC 100 and SSC 120 or equivalent recommended.Limited to 24 students.
Field-based soil studies in California ecosystems. Description and classification of soils; relationships among soils, vegetation, geology, and climate; physical, chemical, and biological processes; their role in land use. Similar to SSC 105; requires additional work for graduate credit.
SSC 208
Soil-Plant Interrelationships
SSC 100;  PLB 111;  or Consent of Instructor.
Plant needs, occurrence and reactions of water and mineral nutrients in soils; root systems and their growth in soils; mass flow and diffusion mechanisms in nutrient acquisition; models relating nutrient uptake to soil and plant characteristics;nutrient assimilation and crop quality.
SSC 211
Advanced Soil Microbiology 
CHE 008A;  CHE 008B;  SSC 111;  BIS 102, BIS 103 or an equivalent course recommended.
Microbial metabolism of organic chemicals in soil, both natural andxenobiotic. Decomposition of organic matter. Kinetics of microbial processes in soil.
SSC 219
Ecosystem Biogeochemistry
Introductory courses in ecology/biology and soils recommended; undergraduates accepted with consent of instructor.
Multidisciplinary analysis of energy and nutrient transfers within terrestrial ecosystems. Examination of processes and inter- and intra-system interactions between the atmosphere, biosphere, lithosphere and hydrosphere. Laboratory section uses biogeochemical simulation models to examine case studies.
SSC 220
Pedology
Consent of Instructor.  SSC 120 recommended.
Topics selected from studies of soil-forming processes, soil-geomorphic relations, mineral weathering, new developments in soil classification, and development of pedologic theory. Topics vary from year to year.
SSC 222
Global Carbon Cycle
CHE 008A;  CHE 008B;  MAT 016A;  MAT 016B;  SSC 100;  Or the equivalent of SSC 100.
Global carbon cycle from Phanerozoic epoch to modern times. Examination of long and short-term carbon cycles.  Transfer of carbon among ocean, land and life with emphasis on humic substance formation, methods of characterization, reactions with organics and soil carbon stabilization.
SSC 290
Special Topics in Soil Science
Graduate standing.
Seminars and critical review of problems, issues, and research in soil science.
SSC 298
Group Study 
Consent of Instructor.
Group Study
SSC 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.

SSC 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Graduate standing.

STA 010
Statistical Thinking
Two years of high school algebra.
Statistics and probability in daily life. Examines principles of collecting, presenting and interpreting data in order to critically assess results reported in the media; emphasis is on understanding polls, unemployment rates, health studies; understanding probability,risk and odds.
STA 012
Introduction to Discrete Probability
Two years of high school algebra.
Random experiments; countable sample spaces; elementary probabilityaxioms; counting formulas; conditional probability; independence; Bayes theorem; expectation; gambling problems; binomial, hypergeometric, Poisson, geometric, negative binomial and multinomial models; limiting distributions; Markov chains. Applications in the social, biological, and engineering sciences.
STA 013
Elementary Statistics
Two years of high school algebra or Mathematics D.
Descriptive statistics; basic probability concepts; binomial, normal, Student's t, and chi-square distributions. Hypothesis testing and confidence intervals for one and two means and proportions. Regression. 
STA 013Y
Elementary Statistics
Two years of high school algebra or Mathematics D.
Descriptive statistics; basic probability concepts; binomial, normal, Student's t, and chi-square distributions. Hypothesis testing and confidence intervals for one and two means and proportions.  Regression.
STA 032
Gateway to Statistical Data Science
MAT 016B or MAT 021B or MAT 017B.
Probability concepts; programming in R; exploratory data analysis; sampling distribution; estimation and inference; linear regression; simulations; resampling methods. Alternative to STA 013 for students with a background in calculus and programming.
STA 032
Gateway to Statistical Data Science
MAT 016B C- or better or MAT 021B C- or better or MAT 017B C- or better.
Probability concepts; programming in R; exploratory data analysis; sampling distribution; estimation and inference; linear regression; simulations; resampling methods. Alternative to STA 013 for students with a background in calculus and programming.
STA 090X
Seminar
Consent of Instructor.  High school algebra.
Examination of a special topic in a small group setting.
STA 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

STA 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

STA 100
Applied Statistics for Biological Sciences
MAT 016B or MAT 017B or MAT 021B.
Descriptive statistics, probability, sampling distributions, estimation, hypothesis testing, contingency tables, ANOVA, regression; implementation of statistical methods using computer package. 
STA 100
Applied Statistics for Biological Sciences
MAT 016B C- or better or MAT 017B C- or better or MAT 021B C- or better.
Descriptive statistics, probability, sampling distributions, estimation, hypothesis testing, contingency tables, ANOVA, regression; implementation of statistical methods using computer package. 
STA 101
Advanced Applied Statistics for the Biological Sciences
STA 100.
Basic experimental designs, two-factor ANOVA without interactions, repeated measures ANOVA, ANCOVA, random effects vs. fixed effects, multiple regression, basic model building, resampling methods, multiple comparisons, multivariate methods, generalized linear models, Monte Carlo simulations.
STA 101
Advanced Applied Statistics for the Biological Sciences
STA 100 C- or better.
Basic experimental designs, two-factor ANOVA without interactions, repeated measures ANOVA, ANCOVA, random effects vs. fixed effects, multiple regression, basic model building, resampling methods, multiple comparisons, multivariate methods, generalized linear models, Monte Carlo simulations.
STA 103
Applied Statistics for Business and Economics
(STA 013 or STA 013Y or STA 032 or STA 100);  (MAT 016B or MAT 017B or MAT 021B).
Descriptive statistics; probability; random variables; expectation; binomial, normal, Poisson, other univariate distributions; joint distributions; sampling distributions, central limit theorem; properties of estimators; linear combinations of random variables; testing and estimation; Minitab computing package.
STA 103
Applied Statistics for Business & Economics
(STA 013 C- or better or STA 013Y C- or better or STA 032 C- or better or STA 100 C- or better);  (MAT 016B C- or better or MAT 017B C- or better or MAT 021B C- or better).
Descriptive statistics; probability; random variables; expectation; binomial, normal, Poisson, other univariate distributions; joint distributions; sampling distributions, central limit theorem; properties of estimators; linear combinations of random variables; testing and estimation; Minitab computing package. May be taught abroad.
STA 104
Applied Statistical Methods: Nonparametric Statistics
STA 013 or STA 013Y or STA 032 or STA 100.
Sign and Wilcoxon tests, Walsh averages. Two-sample procedures. Inferences concerning scale. Kruskal-Wallis test. Measures of association. Chi square and Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests.
STA 104
Applied Statistical Methods: Nonparametric Statistics
STA 013 C- or better or STA 013Y C- or better or STA 032 C- or better or STA 100 C- or better.
Sign and Wilcoxon tests, Walsh averages. Two-sample procedures. Inferences concerning scale. Kruskal-Wallis test. Measures of association. Chi square and Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests.
STA 106
Applied Statistical Methods: Analysis of Variance
STA 013 or STA 013Y or STA 032 or STA 100.
Basics of experimental design. One-way and two-way fixed effects analysis of variance models. Randomized complete and incomplete block design. Multiple comparisons procedures. One-way random effects model. 
STA 106
Applied Statistical Methods: Analysis of Variance
STA 013 C- or better or STA 013Y C- or better or STA 032 C- or better or STA 100 C- or better.
Basics of experimental design. One-way and two-way fixed effects analysis of variance models. Randomized complete and incomplete block design. Multiple comparisons procedures. One-way random effects model. 
STA 108
Applied Statistical Methods: Regression Analysis
STA 013 or STA 013Y or STA 032 or STA 100.
Simple linear regression, variable selection techniques, stepwise regression, analysis of covariance, influence measures, computing packages.
STA 108
Applied Statistical Methods: Regression Analysis
STA 013 C- or better or STA 013Y C- or better or STA 032 C- or better or STA 100 C- or better.
Simple linear regression, variable selection techniques, stepwise regression, analysis of covariance, influence measures, computing packages.
STA 130A
Mathematical Statistics: Brief Course
MAT 016C or MAT 017C or MAT 021C.
Basic probability, densities and distributions, mean, variance, covariance, Chebyshev's inequality, some special distributions, sampling distributions, central limit theorem and law of large numbers, point estimation, some methods of estimation, interval estimation, confidence intervals for certain quantities, computing sample sizes.
STA 130A
Mathematical Statistics: Brief Course
(MAT 016C C- or better or MAT 017C C- or better or MAT 021C C- or better);  (STA 013 C- or better or STA 013Y C- or better or STA 032 C- or better or STA 100 C- or better).
Basic probability, densities and distributions, mean, variance, covariance, Chebyshev's inequality, some special distributions, sampling distributions, central limit theorem and law of large numbers, point estimation, some methods of estimation, interval estimation, confidence intervals for certain quantities, computing sample sizes.
STA 130B
Mathematical Statistics: Brief Course
STA 130A or STA 131A or MAT 135A.
Transformed random variables, large sample properties of estimates. Basic ideas of hypotheses testing, likelihood ratio tests, goodness-of-fit tests. General linear model, least squares estimates, Gauss-Markov theorem. Analysis of variance, F-test. Regression and correlation, multiple regression. Selected topics.
STA 130B
Mathematical Statistics: Brief Course
STA 130A C- or better or STA 131A C- or better or MAT 135A C- or better.
Transformed random variables, large sample properties of estimates. Basic ideas of hypotheses testing, likelihood ratio tests, goodness-of-fit tests. General linear model, least squares estimates, Gauss-Markov theorem. Analysis of variance, F-test. Regression and correlation, multiple regression. Selected topics.
STA 131A
Introduction to Probability Theory
MAT 021B;  MAT 021C;  MAT 022A or MAT 067.
Fundamental concepts of probability theory, discrete and continuous random variables, standard distributions, moments and moment-generating functions, laws of large numbers and the central limit theorem.
STA 131A
Introduction to Probability Theory
MAT 021C C- or better;  (MAT 022A C- or better or MAT 027A C- or better or MAT 067 C- or better);  MAT 021D strongly recommended.
Fundamental concepts of probability theory, discrete and continuous random variables, standard distributions, moments and moment-generating functions, laws of large numbers and the central limit theorem.
STA 131B
Introduction to Mathematical Statistics
STA 131A or MAT 135A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Sampling, methods of estimation, bias-variance decomposition, sampling distributions, Fisher information, confidence intervals, and some elements of hypothesis testing.
STA 131B
Introduction to Mathematical Statistics
STA 131A C- or better or MAT 135A C- or better;  Consent of Instructor.
Sampling, methods of estimation, bias-variance decomposition, sampling distributions, Fisher information, confidence intervals, and some elements of hypothesis testing.
STA 131C
Introduction to Mathematical Statistics
STA 131B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Testing theory, tools and applications from probability theory, Linear model theory, ANOVA, goodness-of-fit.
STA 131C
Introduction to Mathematical Statistics
STA 131B C- or better.
Testing theory, tools and applications from probability theory, Linear model theory, ANOVA, goodness-of-fit.
STA 135
Multivariate Data Analysis
(STA 130B or STA 131B);  (MAT 022A or MAT 067).
Multivariate normal distribution; Mahalanobis distance; sampling distributions of the mean vector and covariance matrix; Hotellings T2; simultaneous inference; one-way MANOVA; discriminant analysis; principal components; canonical correlation; factor analysis. Intensive use of computer analyses and real data sets.
STA 135
Multivariate Data Analysis
(STA 130B C- or better or STA 131B C- or better);  (MAT 022A C- or better or MAT 027A C- or better or MAT 067 C- or better).
Multivariate normal distribution; Mahalanobis distance; sampling distributions of the mean vector and covariance matrix; Hotellings T2; simultaneous inference; one-way MANOVA; discriminant analysis; principal components; canonical correlation; factor analysis. Intensive use of computer analyses and real data sets.
STA 137
Applied Time Series Analysis
STA 108.
Time series relationships; univariate time series models: trend, seasonality, correlated errors; regression with correlated errors; autoregressive models; autoregressive moving average models; spectral analysis: cyclical behavior and periodicity, measures of periodicity, periodogram; linear filtering; prediction of time series; transfer function models.
STA 137
Applied Time Series Analysis
STA 108 C- or better.
Time series relationships; univariate time series models: trend, seasonality, correlated errors; regression with correlated errors; autoregressive models; autoregressive moving average models; spectral analysis: cyclical behavior and periodicity, measures of periodicity, periodogram; linear filtering; prediction of time series; transfer function models.
STA 138
Analysis of Categorical Data
(STA 130B or STA 131B) or (STA 106,  STA 108).
Varieties of categorical data, cross-classifications, contingency tables, tests for independence. Multidimensional tables and log-linear models, maximum likelihood estimation; tests of goodness-of-fit. Logitmodels, linear logistic models. Analysis of incomplete tables. Packaged computer programs, analysis of real data.
STA 141A
Fundamentals of Statistical Data Science
(STA 108 or STA 106);  (STA 032 or STA 100 or STA 013 or STA 013Y).
Introduction to computing for data analysis and visualization, and simulation, using a high-level language (e.g., R). Computational reasoning, computationally intensive statistical methods, reading tabular and non-standard data.
STA 141A
Fundamentals of Statistical Data Science
STA 108 C- or better or STA 106 C- or better.
Introduction to computing for data analysis and visualization, and simulation, using a high-level language (e.g., R). Computational reasoning, computationally intensive statistical methods, reading tabular and non-standard data.
STA 141A
Fundamentals of Statistical Data Science
STA 108 C- or better or STA 106 C- or better.Pass One & Pass Two: open to Statistics Majors, Biostatistics & Statistics graduate students; registration open to all students during schedule adjustment.
Introduction to computing for data analysis & visualization, and simulation, using a high-level language (e.g., R). Computational reasoning, computationally intensive statistical methods, reading tabular & non-standard data.
STA 141B
Data & Web Technologies for Data Analysis
STA 141A.Pass One and Pass Two restricted to Statistics majors and graduate students in Statistics and Biostatistics. Open to all students during Open Registration.  
Essentials of using relational databases and SQL. Processing data in blocks. Scraping Web pages and using Web services/APIs. Basics of text mining. Interactive data visualization with Web technologies. Computational data workflow and best practices. Statistical methods.
STA 141B
Data & Web Technologies for Data Analysis
STA 141A C- or better.Pass One and Pass Two restricted to Statistics majors and graduate students in Statistics and Biostatistics. Open to all students during Open Registration.  
Essentials of using relational databases and SQL. Processing data in blocks. Scraping Web pages and using Web services/APIs. Basics of text mining. Interactive data visualization with Web technologies. Computational data workflow and best practices. Statistical methods.
STA 141C
Big Data & High Performance Statistical Computing
STA 141B or (STA 141A,  ECS 010).Pass One and Pass Two restricted to Statistics majors and graduate students in Statistics and Biostatistics; open to all students during Open registration.  
High-performance computing in high-level data analysis languages; different computational approaches and paradigms for efficient analysis of big data; interfaces to compiled languages; R and Python programming languages; high-level parallel computing; MapReduce; parallel algorithms and reasoning. 
STA 141C
Big Data & High Performance Statistical Computing
STA 141B C- or better or (STA 141A C- or better,  (ECS 010 C- or better or ECS 032A C- or better)).Pass One and Pass Two restricted to Statistics majors and graduate students in Statistics and Biostatistics; open to all students during Open registration.  
High-performance computing in high-level data analysis languages; different computational approaches and paradigms for efficient analysis of big data; interfaces to compiled languages; R and Python programming languages; high-level parallel computing; MapReduce; parallel algorithms and reasoning. 
STA 142A
Statistical Learning I
STA 141A;  (STA 130A or STA 131A or MAT 135A).Pass One restricted to majors.
Fundamental concepts and methods in statistical learning with emphasis on supervised learning. Principles, methodologies and applications of parametric and nonparametric regression, classification, resampling and model selection techniques.
STA 142A
Statistical Learning I
STA 141A C- or better;  (STA 130A C- or better or STA 131A C- or better or MAT 135A C- or better);  STA 131A or MAT 135A preferred.Pass One restricted to Statistics majors.
Fundamental concepts and methods in statistical learning with emphasis on supervised learning. Principles, methodologies and applications of parametric and nonparametric regression, classification, resampling and model selection techniques.
STA 142B
Statistical Learning II
STA 142A;  (STA 130B or STA 131B).Pass One restricted to majors.
Fundamental concepts and methods in statistical learning with emphasis on unsupervised learning. Principles, methodologies and applications of clustering methods, dimension reduction and manifold learning techniques, graphical models and latent variables modeling.
STA 142B
Statistical Learning II
STA 142A C- or better;  (STA 130B C- or better or STA 131B C- or better);  STA 131B preferred.Pass One restricted to Statistics majors.
Fundamental concepts and methods in statistical learning with emphasis on unsupervised learning. Principles, methodologies and applications of clustering methods, dimension reduction and manifold learning techniques, graphical models and latent variables modeling.
STA 144
Sampling Theory of Surveys
(STA 130B or STA 131B) or (STA 106,  STA 108).
Simple random, stratified random, cluster, and systematic sampling plans; mean, proportion, total, ratio, and regression estimators for these plans; sample survey design, absolute and relative error, sample size selection, strata construction; sampling and nonsampling sources of error.
STA 145
Bayesian Statistical Inference
STA 130B or STA 131B.
Subjective probability, Bayes Theorem, conjugate priors, non-informative priors, estimation, testing, prediction, empirical Bayes methods, properties of Bayesian procedures, comparisons with classical procedures, approximation techniques, Gibbs sampling, hierarchical Bayesian analysis, applications, computer implemented data analysis.
STA 145
Bayesian Statistical Inference
STA 130B C- or better or STA 131B C- or better.
Subjective probability, Bayes Theorem, conjugate priors, non-informative priors, estimation, testing, prediction, empirical Bayes methods, properties of Bayesian procedures, comparisons with classical procedures, approximation techniques, Gibbs sampling, hierarchical Bayesian analysis, applications, computer implemented data analysis.
STA 160
Practice in Statistical Data Science
STA 106;  STA 108;  (STA 130B or STA 131B);  (STA 141 or STA 141A).
Principles and practice of interdisciplinary, collaborative data analysis; complete case study review and team data analysis project. 
STA 160
Practice in Statistical Data Science
STA 106 C- or better;  STA 108 C- or better;  (STA 130B C- or better or STA 131B C- or better);  STA 141A C- or better.
Principles and practice of interdisciplinary, collaborative data analysis; complete case study review and team data analysis project. 
STA 160
Practice in Statistical Data Science
STA 106 C- or better;  STA 108 C- or better;  (STA 130B C- or better or STA 131B C- or better);  STA 141A C- or better.Open to undergraduate Statistics majors.
Principles and practice of interdisciplinary, collaborative data analysis; complete case study review and team data analysis project. 
STA 190X
Seminar
STA 013 or STA 013Y or STA 032 or STA 100 or STA 103.
In-depth examination of a special topic in a small group setting.
STA 192
Internship in Statistics
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Work experience in statistics.
STA 194HA
Special Studies for Honors Students
Senior qualifying for honors.
Directed reading, research and writing, culminating in the completion of a senior honors thesis or project under direction of a faculty advisor.
STA 194HB
Special Studies for Honors Students
Senior qualifying for honors.
Directed reading, research and writing, culminating in the completion of a senior honors thesis or project under direction of a faculty advisor.
STA 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.
STA 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

STA 200A
Introduction to Probability Theory
MAT 021A;  MAT 021B;  MAT 021C;  MAT 022A;  Consent of Instructor.
Fundamental concepts of probability theory, discrete and continuous random variables, standard distributions, moments and moment-generating functions, laws of large numbers and the central limit theorem.
STA 200B
Introduction to Mathematical Statistics I
STA 200A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Sampling, methods of estimation, bias-variance decomposition, sampling distributions, Fisher information, confidence intervals, and some elements of hypothesis testing.
STA 200C
Introduction to Mathematical Statistics II
STA 200B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Testing theory, tools and applications from probability theory, Linear model theory, ANOVA, goodness-of-fit.
STA 200C
Introduction to Mathematical Statistics II
STA 200B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Testing theory, tools and applications from probability theory, Linear model theory, ANOVA, goodness-of-fit.
STA 201
SAS Programming for Statistical Analysis
Introductory, upper division statistics course; some knowledge of vectors and matrices; STA 106 or STA 108 or the equivalent suggested.
Introductory SAS language, data management, statistical applications, methods. Includes basics, graphics, summary statistics, data sets, variables and functions, linear models, repetitive code, simple macros, GLIM and GAM, formatting output, correspondence analysis, bootstrap. Prepare SAS base programmer certification exam.
STA 205
Statistical Methods for Research with SAS
An introductory upper division statistics course and some knowledge of vectors and matrices; STA 100, or STA 102, or STA 103 suggested or the equivalent.
Focus on linear statistical models widely used in scientific research. Emphasis on concepts, methods and data analysis using SAS. Topics include simple and multiple linear regression, polynomial regression, diagnostics, model selection, variable transformation, factorial designs and ANCOVA.
STA 206
Statistical Methods for Research - I
Introductory statistics course; some knowledge of vectors and matrices.
Focus on linear statistical models. Emphasis on concepts, method and data analysis; formal mathematics kept to minimum. Topics include simple and multiple linear regression, polynomial regression, diagnostics, model selection, factorial designs and analysis of covariance. Use of professional level software.
STA 207
Statistical Methods for Research II
STA 206;  Knowledge of vectors and matrices.
Linear and nonlinear statistical models emphasis on concepts, methods/data analysis using professional level software; formal mathematics kept to minimum. Topics include linear mixed models, repeated measures, generalized linear models, model selection, analysis of missing data, and multiple testing procedures.
STA 208
Statistical Methods in Machine Learning 
STA 206;  STA 207;  STA 135;  Or their equivalents.
Focus on linear and nonlinear statistical models. Emphasis on concepts, methods, and data analysis; formal mathematics kept to minimum. Topics include resampling methods, regularization techniques in regression and modern classification, cluster analysis and dimension reduction techniques. Use professional level software.
STA 209
Optimization for Big Data Analytics
STA 200A;  STA 208.
Optimization algorithms for solving problems in statistics, machine learning, data analytics. Review computational tools for implementing optimization algorithms (gradient descent, stochastic gradient descent, coordinate descent, Newtons method.)
STA 221
Big Data & High Performance Statistical Computing
STA 220.
High-performance computing in high-level data analysis languages; different computational approaches and paradigms for efficient analysis of big data; interfaces to compiled languages; R and Python programming languages; high-level parallel computing; MapReduce; parallel algorithms and reasoning.
STA 222
Biostatistics: Survival Analysis
STA 131C.
Incomplete data; life tables; nonparametric methods; parametric methods; accelerated failure time models; proportional hazards models; partial likelihood; advanced topics.
STA 223
Biostatistics: Generalized Linear Models
STA 131C.
Likelihood and linear regression; generalized linear model; Binomial regression; case-control studies; dose-response and bioassay; Poisson regression; Gamma regression; quasi-likelihood models; estimating equations; multivariate GLMs.
STA 224
Analysis of Longitudinal Data
((STA 222,  STA 223) or (BST 222,  BST 223));  STA 232B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Standard and advanced methodology, theory, algorithms, and applications relevant for analysis of repeated measurements and longitudinal data in biostatistical and statistical settings.
STA 225
Clinical Trials
STA 223 or BST 223;  or Consent of Instructor.
Basic statistical principles of clinical designs, including bias, randomization, blocking, and masking. Practical applications of widely-used designs, including dose-finding, comparative and cluster randomization designs. Advanced statistical procedures for analysis of data collected in clinical trials.
STA 226
Statistical Methods for Bioinformatics
STA 131C;  or Consent of Instructor.  Data analysis experience recommended.
Standard and advanced statistical methodology, theory, algorithms, and applications relevant to the analysis of -omics data.
STA 231A
Mathematical Statistics I
STA 131A;  STA 131B;  STA 131C;  MAT 025;  MAT 125A;  Or equivalent of MAT 025 and MAT 125A.
First part of three-quarter sequence on mathematical statistics. Emphasizes foundations. Topics include basic concepts in asymptotic theory, decision theory, and an overview of methods of point estimation.
STA 231B
Mathematical Statistics II
STA 231A.
Second part of a three-quarter sequence on mathematical statistics. Emphasizes: hyposthesis testing (including multiple testing) as well as theory for linear models.
STA 231C
Mathematical Statistics III
STA 231A;  STA 231B.
Third part of three-quarter sequence on mathematical statistics. Emphasizes large sample theory and their applications. Topics include statistical functionals, smoothing methods and optimization techniques relevant for statistics.
STA 232A
Applied Statistics I
STA 106;  STA 108;  STA 131A;  STA 131B;  STA 131C;  MAT 167.
Estimation and testing for the general linear model, regression, analysis of designed experiments, and missing data techniques.
STA 232B
Applied Statistics II
STA 106;  STA 108;  STA 131A;  STA 131B;  STA 131C;  STA 232A;  MAT 167.
Alternative approaches to regression, model selection, nonparametric methods amenable to linear model framework and their applications.
STA 232C
Applied Statistics III
STA 106;  STA 108;  STA 131C;  STA 232B;  MAT 167.
Multivariate analysis: multivariate distributions, multivariate linear models, data analytic methods including principal component, factor, discriminant, canonical correlation and cluster analysis.
STA 233
Design Experiments
STA 131C.
Topics from balanced and partially balanced incomplete block designs, fractional factorials, and response surfaces.
STA 235A
Probability Theory
(MAT 125B,  MAT 135A) or STA 131A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Measure-theoretic foundations, abstract integration, independence, laws of large numbers, characteristic functions, central limit theorems. Weak convergence in metric spaces, Brownian motion, invariance principle. Conditional expectation. Topics selected from: martingales, Markov chains, ergodic theory. 
STA 235B
Probability Theory
STA 235A or MAT 235A;  or Consent of Instructor.
Measure-theoretic foundations, abstract integration, independence, laws of large numbers, characteristic functions, central limit theorems. Weak convergence in metric spaces, Brownian motion, invariance principle. Conditional expectation. Topics selected from: martingales, Markov chains, ergodic theory. 
STA 235C
Probability Theory
STA 235B or MAT 235B;  or Consent of Instructor.
Measure-theoretic foundations, abstract integration, independence, laws of large numbers, characteristic functions, central limit theorems. Weak convergence in metric spaces, Brownian motion, invariance principle. Conditional expectation. Topics selected from: martingales, Markov chains, ergodic theory. 
STA 237A
Time Series Analysis
STA 131B;  Or the equivalent of STA 131B.
Advanced topics in time series analysis and applications. Models for experimental data, measures of dependence, large-sample theory, statistical estimation and inference. Univariate and multivariate spectral analysis, regression, ARIMA models, state-space models, Kalman filtering.
STA 237B
Time Series Analysis
STA 131B;  STA 237A;  Or the equivalent of STA 131B.
Advanced topics in time series analysis and applications. Models for experimental data, measures of dependence, large-sample theory, statistical estimation and inference. Univariate and multivariate spectral analysis, regression, ARIMA models, state-space models, Kalman filtering.
STA 238
Theory of Multivariate Analysis
STA 131B;  STA 135.
Multivariate normal and Wishart distributions, Hotellings T-Squared, simultaneous inference, likelihood ratio and union intersection tests, Bayesian methods, discriminant analysis, principal component and factor analysis, multivariate clustering, multivariate regression and analysis of variance, application to data.
STA 240A
Nonparametric Inference
STA 231C;  STA 235A, STA 235B, STA 235C recommended.
Comprehensive treatment of nonparametric statistical inference, including the most basic materials from classical nonparametrics, robustness, nonparametric estimation of a distribution function fromincomplete data, curve estimation, and theory of resampling methodology.
STA 240B
Nonparametric Inference
STA 231C;  STA 235A, STA 235B, STA 235C recommended.
Comprehensive treatment of nonparametric statistical inference, including the most basic materials from classical nonparametrics, robustness, nonparametric estimation of a distribution function fromincomplete data, curve estimation, and theory of re-sampling methodology.
STA 241
Asymptotic Theory of Statistics
STA 231C;  STA 235A, STA 235B, STA 235C desirable.
Topics in asymptotic theory of statistics chosen from weak convergence, contiguity, empirical processes, Edgeworth expansion, and semiparametric inference.
STA 242
Introduction to Statistical Programming
STA 130A;  STA 130B;  or equivalent of STA 130A and STA 130B.
Essentials of statistical computing using a general-purpose statistical language. Topics include algorithms; design; debugging and efficiency; object-oriented concepts; model specification and fitting; statistical visualization; data and text processing; databases; computer systems and platforms; comparison of scientific programming languages. 
STA 243
Computational Statistics
(STA 130A,  STA 130B);  (MAT 067 or MAT 167);  Or equivalent of STA 130A and 130B, or equivalent of MAT 167 or MAT 067.
Numerical analysis; random number generation; computer experiments and resampling techniques (bootstrap, cross validation); numerical optimization; matrix decompositions and linear algebra computations; algorithms (markov chain monte carlo, expectation-maximization); algorithm design and efficiency; parallel and distributed computing. 
STA 250
Topics in Applied & Computational Statistics
STA 131A;  STA 232A recommended, not required.
Resampling, nonparametric and semiparametric methods, incomplete data analysis, diagnostics, multivariate and time series analysis, applied Bayesian methods, sequential analysis and quality control, categorical data analysis, spatial and image analysis, computational biology, functional data analysis, models for correlated data, learning theory.
STA 251
Topics in Statistical Methods & Models
STA 231B;  Or the equivalent of STA 231B.
Topics may include Bayesian analysis, nonparametric and semiparametric regression, sequential analysis, bootstrap, statistical methods in high dimensions, reliability, spatial processes, inference for stochastic process, stochastic methods in finance, empirical processes, change-point problems, asymptotics for parametric, nonparametric and semiparametric models, nonlinear time series, robustness.
STA 252
Advanced Topics in Biostatistics
(STA 222 or BST 222);  (STA 223 or BST 223).
Biostatistical methods and models selected from the following: genetics, bioinformatics and genomics; longitudinal or functional data; clinical trials and experimental design; analysis of environmental data; dose-response, nutrition and toxicology; survival analysis; observational studies and epidemiology; computer-intensive or Bayesian methods in biostatistics. 
STA 260
Statistical Practice & Data Analysis
STA 207 or STA 232B;  Working knowledge of advanced statistical software and the equivalent of STA 207 or STA 232B.Open to students enrolled in the graduate program in Statistics or Biostatistics, as the class also serves to provide professional service to clients and collaborators who work with the students.
Principles and practice of interdisciplinary collaboration in statistics, statistical consulting, ethical aspects, and basics of data analysis and study design. Emphasis on practical consulting and collaboration of statisticians with clients and scientists under instructor supervision.
STA 280
Orientation to Statistical Research
Consent of Instructor.
Guided orientation to original statistical research papers, and oral presentations in class of such papers by students under the supervision of a faculty member.
STA 290
Seminar in Statistics
Consent of Instructor.
Seminar on advanced topics in probability and statistics.
STA 292
Graduate Group in Statistics Seminar
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Advanced study in various fields of statistics with emphasis in applied topics, presented by members of the Graduate Group in Statistics and other guest speakers.
STA 298
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Special topics in Statistics appropriate for study at the graduate level.
STA 299
Individual Study
Consent of Instructor.

STA 299D
Dissertation Research
Consent of Instructor.  Advancement to candidacy for Ph.D.
Research in Statistics under the supervision of major professor.
STA 390
Methods of Teaching Statistics
Graduate standing.
Practical experience in methods/problems of teaching statistics at university undergraduate level.  Lecturing techniques, analysis of tests and supporting material, preparation and grading of examinations, and use of statistical software.  Emphasis on practical training.  
STA 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

STH 250
Research in Social Theory & Comparative History
Admission to Social Theory & Comparative History Designated Emphasis.
Theoretically informed research in comparative history. Students read exemplary works and learn to frame their own research projects. Presentations include Center for History, Society, & Culture faculty and visitors discussing current research.
STH 290
Advanced Topics in Social Theory & Comparative History
HIS 204 or SOC 242A;  and Consent of Instructor.
Interdisciplinary study of particular substantive problems in social theory and comparative history. Topics vary.
STH 295
Advanced Group Research in Social Theory & Comparative History
Consent of Instructor.
Participation in research workshops sponsored by the Center for Comparative Research for History, Society, & Culture.
STS 020
Methods in Science, Technology & Medicine Studies
STS 001 recommended.
Methodological issues concerning the historical, philosophical, sociological, ethical, and political analysis of science, technology, and medicine. Detailed case studies to illustrate different methods of analysis.
STS 040B
Media History 2 1945-Present
STS 040A.
History of media from 1945 to present, with particular focus on the development of the computer, digital network and internet technologies in the context of other media infrastructures like radio, television and satellite networks.  Analysis of inter-related cultural/political topics.
STS 092
Internship
Consent of Instructor.
Work experience off and on campus in all subject areas offered in the program in Science & Technology Studies under the supervision of a  member of the faculty. 
STS 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

STS 108
Intellectual Property in Science
STS 001;  Or other Social Science or Humanities writing course.
Historical and conceptual framework for contemporary debates about intellectual property and science. Topics include U.S. patent system and copyright law, interaction between patents and industrial policy, credit in academic and industrial science, role of IP in global knowledge politics.
STS 109
Visualization in Science: A Critical Introduction
STS 001 or STS 020 or ANT 002 recommended.
Anthropological approaches to scientific visualization techniques, informatics, simulations. Examination of different visualization techniques toward understanding the work involved in producing them, critical assessment of their power and limits, especially when visualizations are used socially to make claims.
STS 121
Special Topics in Medical Anthropology
ANT 002 recommended.
Introduction to critical medical anthropology. Topics include anthropological analysis of bio-medicine, psychiatry, systems of knowledge and healing, the body, emotions, and clinical encounters in a cross-cultural perspective. 
STS 129
Health & Medicine in a Global Context
ANT 002 recommended.
Recent works in medical anthropology and the science studies of medicine dealing with social and cultural aspects of global health issues such as AIDS, pandemics, clinical trials, cultural differences in illnesses, diabetes, organ trafficking, medical technologies, illness narratives, and others.
STS 130A
From Natural History to the History of Nature
HIS 135A recommended.
Evolution and demise of natural history as a discipline from Aristotleto Linnaeus. Considers ancient views of nature and its Renaissance rediscovery; the emergence of biology, botany, geology, and zoology; the history of taxonomy and classification.
STS 130B
History of Modern Biology
STS 130A recommended.
Development of modern biology from pre-Darwinian roots to the present. Considers emergence of modern biological specialities and consolidation of biological theory around evolutionary ideas. History of allied fieldssuch as genetics, paleontology, embryology, ecology, systematics and molecular biology.
STS 131
Darwin
Upper division standing or consent of instructor.
Students will explore the life and times of Charles Darwin and will trace the development of evolutionary thinking before and after the Origin of Species to appreciate its place in Victorian society and in the corpus of Darwins thought.
STS 161
Time: Mechanism & Measurement
STS 001.
Cultural concepts of time; units and instruments of time measurement; historical differences in the social organization of time; and time measurement in 20th-century science.
STS 162
Surveillance Technologies & Social Media
STS 020 or TCS 001.
Study of the ubiquitous presence of CCTV, face recognition software, global tracking systems, biosensors, and data mining practices that have made surveillance part of our daily life.  Exploration of the boundary between security and control, information and spying.
STS 164
Writing Science
STS 001 or ENL 003;  Or equivalent.
Texts and writing practices in the production of scientific knowledge.  Surveys the literary structure of scientific arguments; history of scientific genres; rhetoric and semiotics in scientific culture; graphical systems in the experimental laboratory; narratives of science, including science fiction. 
STS 172
Video Games & Culture
STS 001 or TCS 001 or ENL 003;  Or equivalent of any.
Critical approaches to the study of video games, focusing on formal, historical, and cultural modes of analysis. History of software and hardware in North American and global contexts. Relations of games to society, politics, economics, literature, media, and the arts.
STS 173
Science Fiction
STS 001 or ENL 003;  Or equivalent.
The literary modes and methods of science fiction. Representative texts, authors, and themes of the genre - e.g., time travel, alternative universes, and utopias. Relations of science fiction to science, philosophy, and culture.
STS 175
Laboratory Studies Lab
Upper division standing or consent of instructor.
Hands-on training in Science & Technology Studies fieldwork, interviewing, archival research and data analysis. Review of laboratory studies literature, informed consent procedures, ethics, and care of the data. Individual and group projects possible. 
STS 176
Sociology of Knowledge, Science, & Scientific Knowledge
SOC 001, SOC 002, or SOC 003 recommended.
Social, cultural, and historical dimensions of knowledge, especially scientific knowledge. Problems, methods, and theory in sociology of scientific knowledge. Laboratory and historical case studies. Scientific and technical knowledge in institutional and organizational contexts.
STS 180
Topics in Science & Technology Studies
Course in Science & Technology Studies (STS) or other course-work relevant to topic.
In-depth treatment of selected topics in anthropology, history, philosophy, and sociology of science and related fields. Possible topics include science and society, science and power, scientific explanation, technology and culture, theory testing.
STS 190
Seminar in Science, Technology & Medicine Studies
Open to junior and senior Science & Technology Studies majors only.
Intensive reading, discussion, research and writing by small groups in selected topics of science, technology, and medicine studies scholarship. Emphasis on individual research projects.
STS 192
Internship
Consent of Instructor.
Work experience off and on campus in all subject areas offered in the program in Science & Technology Studies under the supervision of a  member of the faculty. 
STS 195
Research in Data Studies
STS 101;  or Consent of Instructor.
Analysis of real-world data in the form of case studies engaging current issues. Emphasizes teamwork in the identification of problems and sources of relevant data; data cleaning, exploration, analysis, and visualization using R; and interpretation and presentation of results to a variety of stakeholders in oral, visual, and textual formats.
STS 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

STS 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

STS 250
History & Philosophy of Science
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Interdisciplinary seminar in the history and philosophy of science. Focuses on issues such as historiography, methodology, and the conceptual foundations of science. 
STS 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

STS 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.

STS 396
Teaching Assitant Training Practicum
Graduate standing.

SUR 192
Internship in General Surgery
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing; approval of project prior to period of internship by preceptor.
Supervised work experience in general surgery and related fields.
SUR 199
Special Study in General Surgery for Advanced Undergraduates
Advanced undergraduate student with consent of instructor.

SUR 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

SUR 430
Surgery Clerkship
Approval by School of Medicine Committee on Student Progress.
Eight week general surgery clerkship includes GI, Burn, Oncology, Plastics, Vascular Cardiothoracic, consult, transplant and trauma.  Clerkship assignments are at UCDMC.  Daily core material presentations and reading assignments.  Student involvement includes work-up and care of surgical patients.
SUR 430F
SJVP Surgery Clerkship at UCSF
Approval by School of Medicine Committee on Student Progress.
General surgery clerkship includes GI, Burn, Oncology, Plastics, Vascular Cardiothoracic, consult, transplant and trauma. Clerkship assignments are at UCSF Fresno. Student involvement includes work-up and care of surgical patients.
SUR 430R
Rural PRIME Surgery Longitudinal Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.
Surgery Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
SUR 430RA
Rural PRIME Surgery Longitudinal Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.
Surgery Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
SUR 430RB
Rural PRIME Surgery Longitudinal Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.
Surgery Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
SUR 430RC
Rural PRIME Surgery Longitudinal Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.
Surgery Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
SUR 430RD
Rural PRIME Surgery Longitudinal Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.
Surgery Longitudinal Integrated Clerkship for the Rural PRIME Program.
SUR 439D
Directed Clinical Studies in Surgery
Consent of Instructor.  Partial completion of a Clinical Rotation.
Individual directed studies in extended preparation for modified curriculum or to complete a clinical rotation following a leave of absence.  
SUR 439R
Directed Studies in Surgery 
Consent of Instructor.
Individual directed studies in extended preparation for remediation of all or part of clinical rotation. Clinical studies to accommodate and satisfy remedial work as directed by the Committee on Student Progress and approved by the course IOR.  
SUR 450
Surgical Skills Boot Camp
Consent of Instructor.
Goal of the surgical skills boot camp didactic is to enable students to demonstrate competence in basic surgical skills and theory, using analytical thinking and hands-on simulation.
SUR 461
Surgery Burn Unit Clerkship
SUR 430;  and Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year medical student or third-year medical student.
Rotation through Surgery Specialty Clinics:Vascular, GI, GU, Thoracic, Plastic, Radiotherapy. Student works up one new and two return visit patients. Presents consult to on-site faculty. Weekly review with preceptor and course director. Reading assignments to add perspective for in-depth discussions.
SUR 462
Surgery Trauma Service Clerkship
SUR 430;  and Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year medical student, or third-year medical student.
Student works as an extern on one of the two general surgery Trauma teams, participating in resuscitation and management of critically injured patients. Team hours consist of 24 hours on, and 24 hours off.
SUR 463
Surgery Intensive Care Unit
SUR 430;  and Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year medical student, or third-year medical student.
Student participates in direct supervision of critically ill surgical patients in a twelve-bed surgery ICU. Each student is closely supervised. Provides in-depth experience with management of critically ill patients.
SUR 466
Clinical Plastic Surgery Elective
SUR 430;  and Consent of Instructor.  Third- or fourth-year medical students.
Total involvement in patient care involving surgical preparation, treatment, operative care, and follow-up. Developing and understanding reconstruction and aesthetic plastic surgery. Microvascular surgery included. Student rotation.
SUR 467
Surgical Oncology 
SUR 430;  and Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year medical student, or third-year medical student.
Students actively participate in management of patients requiring surgery for cancer, endocrine disease and selected general surgical problems. Cases include malignant melanoma, sarcomas, gastrointestinal cancer, head and neck pathology, and metastatic malignancies. Attending rounds daily. Four teaching conferences weekly.
SUR 468
Cardiothoracic Surgery Clerkship
SUR 430;  and Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year medical student, or third-year medical student.
Student works as an extern on the Cardiothoracic Surgical Service, participating in perioperative management and operations on the heart, lungs, mediastinum, and other thoracic structures. Regularly scheduled teaching conferences are conducted.
SUR 471
Gastrointestinal Surgery
SUR 430;  IMD 430;  PED 430;  and Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year medical student or third-year medical student.
Student participates on the GI Surgery Service, working under the immediate supervision of the faculty and surgical housestaff, involving the full spectrum of gastrointestinal diseases performed by the medical student.
SUR 472
Vascular Surgery 
SUR 430;  IMD 430;  PED 430;  and Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year medical student or third-year medical student.
Student participates on the vascular surgery service and in the management and operations of arterial and venous system, exclusive of diseases that require cardiopulmonary bypass for treatment. Includes patient care responsibilities with appropriate supervision.
SUR 474
Colorectal Surgery
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year medical student.
Students actively participate in clinic and the operating room on colon and rectal patients.  This includes medical and surgical management.  Assignments involve work up and care of the surgical patients.
SUR 475
Pediatric Surgery
SUR 430;  and Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year medical student or third-year medical student.
Care of patients with neonatal congenital surgical problems. Fluid and electrolyte management in infants. General experience with acquired surgical diseases in children.
SUR 476
Surgical Consult Service
SUR 430;  and Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year medical student or third-year medical student.
Students function as acting interns working in parallel with the interns on the service. They consult on all non-trauma patients in the emergency room and on the wards and also participate in the operating room.
SUR 477
Clinically Oriented Anatomy
Completion of three years of medical school.Restricted to fourth-year medical student only.
Anatomy of selected regions of the body using cadaver dissection, prosections and interactive CD ROMs. Anatomical relationships relevant to common surgical procedures. Surgical and interventional radiology procedures.
SUR 478
Surgical Preceptorship: Off Campus
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year medical student.
Student participates in the preoperative, operative and postoperative care of surgical patients under the supervision of attending staff.
SUR 480
Insights in Surgery 
Consent of Instructor.  Medical student in good academic standing.
Individualized activities, including ward rounds, subspecialty clinics and conferences, grand rounds, and observation of a variety of surgical procedures.
SUR 481
Interactive Clinical Case Presentation (ICCP)
Fourth-year medical students; however, course is open for third- and fourth-year student observers.Course taught as one session (4 hours) per month for three quarters (July to March); students who enroll can earn up to three credits and the minimum requirements will be to attend at least six sessions; students can do all nine sessions and work toward an honor; for the written part students will have to pick two of the nine case presentations and write a detailed paper with a literature review on The Current management of that disease-this can in fact be a manuscript submitted for publication with a faculty member as an advisor; maximum of 10-15 students in good standing.
Case presentation of common clinical scenarios (i.e. chestpain/MI; fever/pneumonia; abdo pain/chlecy stites, etc.) from various discipline held in an auditorium with real patients exposure. Interactive session to review history, physical findings and case management. Students will be asked to perform H&P.
SUR 493B
Critically Ill Surgical Patients SSM
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to UC Davis School of Medicine students only.
Special Study Module, a four-week course on the topic: Application of Basic Cardiopulmonary Physiology to Problems Encountered in Critically Ill Surgical Patients.
SUR 493C
Physiological Principles in SICU SSM
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to UC Davis School of Medicine students only.
Special Study Module, a four-week course on the topic: Care of the Critically Ill Surgical Patient: Use of Physiological Principles to Guide Treatment of Patients with Common Surgical Problems.
SUR 493D
Interdisciplinary Study of Gastrointestinal Cancer
Consent of Instructor.
In-depth study of gastrointestinal, hepatic and pancreatic cancer. Emphasis on an integration of basic science and clinical medicine. Participating departments include pathology, surgical oncology, medical oncology, gastroenterology, radiology and radiotherapy. 
SUR 494H
Fourth-Year Surgical Honors Program
SUR 430;  and Consent of Instructor.  Completion of third year of medical school with superior performance on SUR 430.
To provide intensive and comprehensive training in surgery to students interested in a postgraduate surgical career, that would enable them to succeed during the internship and residency training.
SUR 495
Intense Introduction to Cardiac Surgery
Consent of Instructor.Restricted to between first- and second-year medical student; 100% mandatory attendance. 
Close contact with vascular surgeon for two-week period. Includes Sunday mornings. Physiology of going on and off cardiopulmonary bypass. Atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, structural and valvular heart disease and electrical and rhythmic heart disease.
SUR 498
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.  Medical student.
Directed reading and discussion and/or laboratory investigation on selected topics.
SUR 499
Laboratory Research
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of second year of medical school.
Laboratory research on surgically related problems. Participation in projects to include the following: burn, nutrition, oncology, transplant and others.
TCS 104
Documentary Production
TCS 007B;  TCS 155;  Or equivalent proficiency to TCS 007B.
Traditional and new forms of documentary, with focus on technocultural issues.  Skills and strategies for producing work in various media. Progression through all stages of production, from conception through post-production to critique. 
TCS 120
History of Sound in the Arts
TCS 001.
A survey of the use of sound, voice, noise, and modes of listening in the modernist, avante-garde, and experimental arts, from the late-19th century to the present. Focus on audiophonic and audiovisual technologies.
TCS 151
Topics in  Virtuality
TCS 001.
Social, political, economic, and aesthetic factors in virtual reality. Artificial environments, telepresence, and simulated experience. Focus on contemporary artists' work and writing.
TCS 151
Topics in  Virtuality
TCS 001.
Social, political, economic, and aesthetic factors in virtual reality. Artificial environments, telepresence, and simulated experience. Focus on contemporary artists' work and writing.
TCS 170A
Advanced Technocultural Workshop
TCS 007A;  Or equivalent.
Workshop in advanced technocultural digital skills: Digital Imaging.
TCS 170B
Advanced Technocultural Workshop
TCS 007B;  Or equivalent.
Workshop in advanced technocultural digital skills: Digital Video.
TCS 170C
Advanced Technocultural Workshop
TCS 007C.
Workshop in advanced technocultural digital skills: Digital Sound.
TCS 170D
Advanced Technocultural Workshop
TCS 007D.
Workshop in advanced technocultural digital skills: Web Design.
TCS 170E
Advanced Technocultural Workshop
Consent of Instructor.
Workshop in advanced technocultural digital skills: Topics in Digital Production.
TCS 175
Small Scale Film Production
Consent of Instructor.
Lecture and intensive workshop teaching small-scale film production. Appointments as a(n) director, director of photography, actor, writer, lighting designer, sound designer and other critical positions are used to produce and submit a short film to a film festival.
TCS 197T
Tutoring in Technocultural Studies
Consent of Instructor.
Undergraduates assist the instructor by tutoring students in one of the department's regularly scheduled courses. 
TTP 200
Transportation Survey Methods
STA 013 or STA 013Y;  ECI 251 recommended.
Description of types of surveys commonly used in transportation demand modeling, including travel and activity diaries, attitudinal, panel, computer, and stated-response surveys. Discussion of sampling, experimental design, and survey design issues. Analysis methods, including factor, discriminant and cluster analysis.
TTP 210
Fundamentals of Transportation Technology
MAT 021A;  MAT 021B;  MAT 022A;  and Consent of Instructor.  Graduate or junior/senior undergraduate as a technical elective.Limited enrollment.
Designed to prepare in the basics of thermodynamics, fluid mechanics and heat transfer as they relate to transportation.
TTP 289A
Selected Topics in Transportation Technology & Policy
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study of special topics with instruction carried out through lecture or laboratory, or a combination of both. 
TTP 289B
Selected Topics in Transportation Technology & Policy
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study of special topics with instruction carried out lecture or laboratory, or a combination of both. 
TTP 290C
Graduate Research Group Conference
Consent of Instructor.
Research problems, progress, and techniques in transportation.
TTP 292
Internship in TTP
Consent of Instructor.  Second year standing; approval of project prior to period of internship.
Supervised work experience in transportation studies. 
TTP 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

TTP 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.

TTP 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Graduate standing.

TXC 092
Internship in Textiles & Clothing
Consent of Instructor.
Work experience off campus in a textiles or clothing-related area. Supervision by a member of the Textiles & Clothing faculty.
TXC 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Group Study
TXC 107
Social & Psychological Aspects of Clothing
SOC 002.
Social and cognitive factors influencing management and perception of personal appearance in everyday life. Concepts and methods appropriate to the study of meaning of clothes in social and cultural contexts.
TXC 162
Textile Fabrics
TXC 006.
Properties of fabrics as related to serviceability, comfort, and appearance.
TXC 162L
Textile Fabrics Laboratory
TXC 162 (can be concurrent).
Laboratory methods and procedures employed in studying properties of textile fabrics as related to serviceability, comfort, and appearance.
TXC 163
Textile Coloration & Finishing
TXC 006;  (FPS 110 or CHE 008B).
Basic principles of textile dyeing, printing, and finishing; color theory; structure, properties, and application of dyes and finishes; factors affecting application and fastness; maintenance of dyed and finished textiles.
TXC 163L
Textile Coloration & Finishing Laboratory
TXC 163 (can be concurrent).
Demonstrates various aspects of dyeing, printing, and finishing of textile substrates including the effect of fiber and finish type, andphysical and chemical variables on dyeing and finishing processes and on the properties of the resultant textile.
TXC 164
Principles of Apparel Production
TXC 006 or TXC 008.
Overview of characteristics, technology, processes, and research in apparel manufacturing industries including study of government statistics, material utilization and fabrication, mechanization, management, and production engineering.
TXC 165
Textile Processes
TXC 006.
Physical processes involved in the production of textiles from the individual fiber to the finished fabric. Includes spinning, texturing, yarn formation, weaving preparation, weaving and knitting, tufting and fabric finishing.
TXC 171
Clothing Materials Science
TXC 006;  TXC 008;  senior standing.
The properties, characterization, and performance evaluation of clothing materials and structures for specific functional applications. Principles and methods related to wetting and transport properties, fabric hand and aesthetic properties, clothing comfort, and material and assembly technology.
TXC 173
Principles of Fashion Marketing
TXC 008;  (ECN 001A or ECN 001AV);  (ARE 113 or ARE 136).
Study of basic elements of fashion marketing including philosophy and objectives, organization, merchandising, pricing, promotion and personnel.
TXC 174
Introduction to World Trade in Textiles & Clothing
TXC 008.
Structure of the global fiber/textile/apparel complex and its distribution patterns with an overview of political, economic and technological factors that are changing these industries and their markets.
TXC 180A
Introduction to Research in Textiles 
Consent of Instructor.  Senior standing with textile-related major.
Senior thesis on independent problems. Research begun in TXC 180A continued and completed in TXC 180B.
TXC 180B
Introduction to Research in Textiles
Consent of Instructor.  Senior standing with textile-related major.
Senior thesis on independent problems. Research begun in TXC 180A continued and completed in TXC 180B.
TXC 192
Internship in Textiles & Clothing
Consent of Instructor.
Work-learn experience off campus in a textiles or clothing-related area. Supervision by a member of the Textiles & Clothing faculty.
TXC 197T
Tutoring in Textiles & Clothing
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division textiles-related major.
Tutoring of students in Textiles & Clothing courses. Assistance with discussion groups and laboratory sections under supervision of instructor.
TXC 230
Behavorial Science Concepts in Textiles
TXC 107;  Upper division or graduate course in statistics (e.g., AMR 120) and one in a behavioral science (e.g., PSC 145).
Examination of theories and research concerning relationships between clothing and human behavior with emphasis on research techniques, including methods of measuring clothing variables.
TXC 290C
Research Conference
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Individual faculty members meet with their graduate students. Critical presentations of original research are made by graduate students. Research activities are planned. Discussions are led by major professors for their research groups.
TXC 293
Recent Advances in Textiles
Two upper division courses in Textiles & Clothing (TXC) or consent of instructor.
Critical reading and evaluation on selected topics of current interest in textiles. Multidisciplinary aspects of the topics selected will be stressed.
TXC 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Graduate standing.
Teaching assistant, training practicum.
URO 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

URO 400
Office Urology
Fourth-year medical students with consent of instructor.
Introduction to ambulatory care of urologic patients including basic therapeutic and diagnostic procedures from case material referred toprivate clinic. Management of urinary tract infection will be emphasized.
URO 460
Urology Clinical Clerkship
Consent of Instructor.  Third-year medical student; physical diagnosis or the equivalent.Limited enrollment.
Clinical experience in diagnosis and treatment of urologic disease. Student will work closely with house staff, participate in conferences and surgery, and perform initial patient evaluation on new patients.
URO 461
Externship in Urology
Consent of Instructor.  Fourth-year medical students.
Under supervision, student acting as intern will assume full inpatient responsibility including admission history, physical examination, management of hospitalization, and participate in surgical procedures, outpatient clinic and learning diagnostic and therapeutic procedures. 
URO 499
Research in Urology
Medical or veterinary medical students with consent of instructor.
Research in oncology, male infertility, urodynamics, neurogenic bladder. Unique opportunity to apply recent technologies (nuclear medicine resonance, flow cytometry, recombinant DNA) in investigation, diagnosis and treatment of GU cancer, infectious disease, male infertility and development of genitourinary bioprosthetics.
UWP 001
Introduction to Academic Literacies
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Introduction to reading and composing processes and key rhetorical concepts for academic literacies. Multiple drafts of composing projects in a variety of genres and modes with feedback from peers and the instructor.
UWP 001V
Introduction to Academic Literacies: Online
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Introduction to reading and composing processes and key rhetorical concepts for academic literacies. Multiple drafts of composing projects in a variety of genres and modes with feedback from peers and the instructor.
UWP 001Y
Introduction to Academic Literacies
Completion of Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR).
Introduction to reading and composing processes and key rhetorical concepts for academic literacies. Multiple drafts of composing projects in a variety of genres and modes with feedback from peers and the instructor.
UWP 007
Practices in College Reading and Writing
Students placed into the course via AWPE score of 4 or lower.
Development of skills required for success in college-level writing across genres and disciplines. Integrates reading, critical thinking, and written communication, using texts from across the curriculum. 
UWP 007M
Entry Level Writing: Practices in College Reading & Writing for Multilingual Writers
Enrollment via campus placement (using the English Language Placement Exam or Analytical Writing Placement Exam) or after successful completion of UWP 022.Only open to students who have not yet fulfilled the Entry Level Writing Requirement (ELWR). 
Development of multilingual writers' composition and English language skills across genres and disciplines. Integrates college-level reading, critical thinking, and written communication, using texts from across the curriculum. 
UWP 010
Introduction to Professional Writing Studies
UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y;  Or the equivalent.
Introduction to writing as an object of study and to theories and research in the field. Survey of how writing is created, disseminated, and used in private, public, and academic contexts. 
UWP 013
Video Game Rhetorics
UWP 001 C- or better or UWP 001V C- or better or UWP 001Y C- or better or ENL 003 C- or better or COM 001 C- or better or COM 002 C- or better or COM 003 C- or better or COM 004 C- or better or NAS 005 C- or better.
Examination of video games as rhetorical texts whose meaning is produced through complex interplay of procedures, narratives, rules, and context. Writing about video games using critical perspectives and analytic methods.
UWP 022
Intermediate Academic Reading & Writing for Multilingual Students
UWP 021.Pass One passed UWP 021 with C- or better OR a score of 70-79 on the English Language Placement Examination (ELPE) offered by the UWP.
Reading and writing short multi-paragraph texts for academic purposes. Suitable for students whose primary home language was not English.
UWP 023
Advanced Academic Reading and Writing for Multilingual Students
UWP 022.Pass One passed course 22 with a C- or better OR a score of 80-89 on the English Language Placement Examination (ELPE) offered by the UWP.
Reading and writing source/research-based texts for academic purposes. Suitable for students whose primary home language was not English.
UWP 023
Advanced Academic Reading and Writing for Multilingual Students
UWP 022.Pass One passed course 22 with a C- or better OR a score of 80-89 on the English Language Placement Examination (ELPE) offered by the UWP.
Reading and writing source/research-based texts for academic purposes. Suitable for students whose primary home language was not English.
UWP 025
Academic Writing for ESL Students
Consent of Instructor.
Writing skills necessary for upper division courses, including skills crucial to writing lab and project reports, summaries, critiques, abstracts, and responses to exam questions.  Includes practice with the syntax, grammar, and vocabulary characteristics of academic writing.
UWP 026
Reading in Scientific & Technical Subjects for ESL Students
Consent of Instructor.
Instruction and practice in reading scientific and technical texts. Techniques for comprehending and analyzing grammatical and organizational patterns. Notetaking skills, summarizing, vocabulary enrichment.
UWP 028
Persuasive Writing for Multilingual Students
UWP 001 C- or better or UWP 001V C- or better or UWP 001Y C- or better or ENL 003 C- or better or COM 001 C- or better or COM 002 C- or better or COM 003 C- or better or COM 004 C- or better or NAS 005 C- or better.
Instruction in analyzing style of persuasive texts, using appropriate vocabulary, and applying English grammatical structures in argumentation. Suitable for multilingual students desiring additional instruction in persuasive English writing.
UWP 029
Research Writing for Multilingual Students
UWP 001 C- or better or UWP 001V C- or better or UWP 001Y C- or better or ENL 003 C- or better or COM 002 C- or better or COM 002 C- or better or COM 003 C- or better or COM 004 C- or better or NAS 005 C- or better.
Reading and writing effectively in various research genres across the disciplines. Suitable for multilingual students desiring additional instruction in the linguistic and rhetorical features of research writing in English for academic purposes. 
UWP 048
Style in the Essay
UWP 001 C- or better or UWP 001V C- or better or UWP 001Y C- or better or ENL 003 C- or better or COM 001 C- or better or COM 002 C- or better or COM 003 C- or better or COM 004 C- or better or NAS 005 C- or better;  or equivalent.Restricted to completion of UWP 001, or equivalent, with C- (P) or better.
Principles of style, language, and structure in the essay. Analysis and development of voice and genre, including sentence revision for force and clarity, and development of effective paragraphs and essays. 
UWP 049
Writing Research Papers
UWP 001 C- or better or UWP 001V C- or better or UWP 001Y C- or better or ENL 003 C- or better or COM 001 C- or better or COM 002 C- or better or COM 003 C- or better or COM 004 C- or better or NAS 005 C- or better;  or equivalent.Restricted to completion of UWP 1, or equivalent, with C- (P) or better.
Principles of research writing. Analysis and development of research topics and effective arguments, including critical reading, analysis, integration, and documentation of source material. 
UWP 092
Internship in Writing
UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y or ENL 003.
Internships in fields where students can practice their skills.
UWP 098
Directed Group Study
UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y or ENL 003;  Or equivalent course; consent of instructor.

UWP 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y or ENL 003;  Or equivalent course; consent of instructor.

UWP 100
Genre Theory & Professional Writing
(UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y);  UWP 010;  Or the equivalent of UWP 001.
Introduction to discipline of professional writing. Examination of writing as a social practice, using genre theory as a conceptual framework. Analysis of how genres function rhetorically in specific contexts and how social systems both shape and are shaped by genres.
UWP 101
Advanced Composition
UWP 001 C- or better or UWP 001V C- or better or UWP 001Y C- or better or COM 001 C- or better or COM 002 C- or better or COM 003 C- or better or COM 004 C- or better or ENL 003 C- or better or NAS 005 C- or better;  and upper division standing.
Instruction in advanced principles of expository writing. Writing tasks within and beyond the University. Different writing modes, including narrative, analysis, explanation, argument, critique. May be taught abroad.
UWP 102A
Writing in the Disciplines: Special Topics
UWP 001 C- or better or UWP 001V C- or better or UWP 001Y C- or better or ENL 003 C- or better or COM 001 C- or better or COM 002 C- or better or COM 003 C- or better or COM 004 C- or better or NAS 005 C- or better;  and upper division standing.Open to majors or to students concurrently enrolled in an upper division course in a specific academic discipline or interdisciplinary field.
Advanced instruction in writing in that discipline and practice in effective styles of communication.
UWP 102B
Writing in the Disciplines: Biology
UWP 001 C- or better or UWP 001V C- or better or UWP 001Y C- or better or ENL 003 C- or better or COM 001 C- or better or COM 002 C- or better or COM 003 C- or better or COM 004 C- or better or NAS 005 C- or better;  and upper division standing.Open to majors in a biological science or to students concurrently enrolled in an upper division biological science course.
Advanced instruction in writing in biology. 
UWP 102C
Writing in the Disciplines: History
UWP 001 C- or better or UWP 001V C- or better or UWP 001Y C- or better or ENL 003 C- or better or COM 001 C- or better or COM 002 C- or better or COM 003 C- or better or COM 004 C- or better or NAS 005 C- or better;  and upper division standing.Open to majors in history or to students concurrently enrolled in an upper division course accepted for the history major.
Advanced instruction in writing in history.
UWP 102D
Writing in the Disciplines: International Relations
UWP 001 C- or better or UWP 001V C- or better or UWP 001Y C- or better or ENL 003 C- or better or COM 001 C- or better or COM 002 C- or better or COM 003 C- or better or COM 004 C- or better or NAS 005 C- or better;  and upper division standing.Open to majors in international relations or to students concurrently enrolled in an upper division course accepted for the major.
Advanced instruction in writing in international relations.
UWP 102E
Writing in the Disciplines: Engineering
UWP 001 C- or better or UWP 001V C- or better or UWP 001Y C- or better or ENL 003 C- or better or COM 001 C- or better or COM 002 C- or better or COM 003 C- or better or COM 004 C- or better or NAS 005 C- or better;  and upper division standing.Open to upper division students in the College of Engineering and to students enrolled in an upper division engineering or computer science course for the major.
Advanced instruction in writing in engineering.
UWP 102F
Writing in the Disciplines: Food Science & Technology
UWP 001 C- or better or UWP 001V C- or better or UWP 001Y C- or better or ENL 003 C- or better or COM 001 C- or better or COM 002 C- or better or COM 003 C- or better or COM 004 C- or better or NAS 005 C- or better;  and upper division standing.Open to majors in food science and technology and to students concurrently enrolled in an upper division course in food science and technology.
Advanced instruction in writing in food science & technology.
UWP 102G
Writing in the Disciplines: Environmental Writing
UWP 001 C- or better or UWP 001V C- or better or UWP 001Y C- or better or ENL 003 C- or better or COM 001 C- or better or COM 002 C- or better or COM 003 C- or better or COM 004 C- or better or NAS 005 C- or better;  and upper division standing.Open to students with upper division coursework with an environmental focus. 
Advanced instruction in writing and practice in effective styles of communication in the fields of environmental study, policy, or advocacy.
UWP 102H
Writing in the Disciplines: Human Development & Psychology
UWP 001 C- or better or UWP 001V C- or better or UWP 001Y C- or better or ENL 003 C- or better or COM 001 C- or better or COM 002 C- or better or COM 003 C- or better or COM 004 C- or better or NAS 005 C- or better;  and upper division standing.Open to majors and minors or to students concurrently enrolled in an upper division course in Human Development or Psychology.
Advanced instruction in writing and practice in effective styles of communication in Human Development & Psychology.  
UWP 102I
Writing in the Disciplines: Ethnic Studies
UWP 001 C- or better or UWP 001V C- or better or UWP 001Y C- or better or ENL 003 C- or better or COM 001 C- or better or COM 002 C- or better or COM 003 C- or better or COM 004 C- or better or NAS 005 C- or better;  and upper division standing.Open to majors and minors in ethnic studies, or students with upper division coursework focusing on race and ethnicity.
Advanced instruction in cross-disciplinary writing about race and ethnicity and practice in effective styles of communication.  
UWP 102J
Writing in the Disciplines: Fine Arts
UWP 001 C- or better or UWP 001V C- or better or UWP 001Y C- or better or ENL 003 C- or better or COM 001 C- or better or COM 002 C- or better or COM 003 C- or better or COM 004 C- or better or NAS 005 C- or better;  and upper division standing.Open to majors and minors or to students concurrently enrolled in an upper division course in Art History, Art Studio, Design, Music, or Theater & Dance.
Advanced instruction in writing about the arts and practice in effective styles of communication.  
UWP 102K
Writing in the Disciplines: Sociology
UWP 001 C- or better or UWP 001V C- or better or UWP 001Y C- or better or ENL 003 C- or better or COM 001 C- or better or COM 002 C- or better or COM 003 C- or better or COM 004 C- or better or NAS 005 C- or better;  and upper division standing.Open to majors and minors in Sociology or to students concurrently enrolled in an upper division Sociology course.
Advanced instruction in writing and practice in effective styles of communication in Sociology and related academic and professional fields.
UWP 102L
Writing in the Disciplines: Film Studies
UWP 001 C- or better or UWP 001V C- or better or UWP 001Y C- or better or ENL 003 C- or better or COM 001 C- or better or COM 002 C- or better or COM 003 C- or better or COM 004 C- or better or NAS 005 C- or better;  and upper division standing.Open to majors and minors or to students concurrently enrolled in an upper division course in Film Studies, Technocultural Studies, English, American Studies, or any other upper division course that includes the analysis and understanding of film as a medium. 
Advanced instruction in writing about film and practice in effective styles of communication.
UWP 102M
Writing in the Disciplines: Community & Regional Development
UWP 001 C- or better or UWP 001V C- or better or UWP 001Y C- or better or ENL 003 C- or better or COM 001 C- or better or COM 002 C- or better or COM 003 C- or better or COM 004 C- or better or NAS 005 C- or better;  and upper division standing.Open to upper division Community and Regional Development majors and minors or upper division students concurrently enrolled in an upper division Community and Regional Development course.
Advanced instruction in writing in the Community & Regional Development discipline and practice in effective styles of communication.
UWP 102N
Writing in the Disciplines: Anthropology
UWP 001 C- or better or UWP 001V C- or better or UWP 001Y C- or better or ENL 003 C- or better or COM 001 C- or better or COM 002 C- or better or COM 003 C- or better or COM 004 C- or better or NAS 005 C- or better;  4 or 5 on AP English Lit and Comp exam; or 6 or better on IB HL English Exam.Restricted to upper division standing; Anthropology Major or Minor.
Advanced instruction in writing and practice in effective styles of communication in Anthropology and related academic and professional fields.
UWP 104A
Writing in the Professions: Business Writing
UWP 001 C- or better or UWP 001V C- or better or UWP 001Y C- or better or ENL 003 C- or better or COM 001 C- or better or COM 002 C- or better or COM 003 C- or better or COM 004 C- or better or NAS 005 C- or better;  and upper division standing.
Effective communication in and for organizations, including corporations, government agencies, and non-profit. Suitable for students entering careers such as management, public relations, and grant writing.
UWP 104AY
Writing in the Professions: Business Writing
UWP 001 C- or better or UWP 001V C- or better or UWP 001Y C- or better or ENL 003 C- or better or COM 001 C- or better or COM 002 C- or better or COM 003 C- or better or COM 004 C- or better or NAS 005 C- or better;  and upper division standing.
Effective communication in and for organizations, including corporations, government agencies, and nonprofit. Suitable for students entering careers such as management, public relations, and grant writing.
UWP 104B
Writing in the Professions: Law
UWP 001 C- or better or UWP 001V C- or better or UWP 001Y C- or better or ENL 003 C- or better or COM 001 C- or better or COM 002 C- or better or COM 003 C- or better or COM 004 C- or better or NAS 005 C- or better;  and upper division standing.
Advanced principles of critical thinking, argumentation, and style, with special emphasis on their application in the legal profession. Suitable for students planning careers in law, business, administration, or management.
UWP 104C
Writing in the Professions: Journalism
UWP 001 C- or better or UWP 001V C- or better or UWP 001Y C- or better or ENL 003 C- or better or COM 001 C- or better or COM 002 C- or better or COM 003 C- or better or COM 004 C- or better or NAS 005 C- or better;  and upper division standing.
Non-fiction for magazines and newspapers, with attention to style and language. Emphasis on research, interviewing, market analysis, and query letters.
UWP 104D
Writing in the Professions: Elementary & Secondary Education
UWP 001 C- or better or UWP 001V C- or better or UWP 001Y C- or better or ENL 003 C- or better or COM 001 C- or better or COM 002 C- or better or COM 003 C- or better or COM 004 C- or better or NAS 005 C- or better;  and upper division standing.
Advanced expository writing in the contemporary American classroom. Strongly recommended for teaching credential candidates.
UWP 104E
Writing in the Professions: Science
UWP 001 C- or better or UWP 001V C- or better or UWP 001Y C- or better or ENL 003 C- or better or COM 001 C- or better or COM 002 C- or better or COM 003 C- or better or COM 004 C- or better or NAS 005 C- or better;  and upper division standing or enrollment in a graduate science curriculum.
Writing abstracts, research proposals, scientific papers, other forms of scientific communication. Presenting data graphically. Primarily for students engaged in or planning careers in basic or applied research.
UWP 104F
Writing in the Professions: Health
UWP 001 C- or better or UWP 001V C- or better or UWP 001Y C- or better or ENL 003 C- or better or COM 001 C- or better or COM 002 C- or better or COM 003 C- or better or COM 004 C- or better or NAS 005 C- or better;  and upper division standing.Not open to students who have taken UWP 104FY. 
Advanced expository writing common in the health professions, emphasizing effective communication between the writer and different audiences. Topics relate to health, disability, and disease. Suitable for students planning careers in professions such as medicine, dentistry, physical therapy, optometry.
UWP 104FY
Writing in the Professions: Health
UWP 001 C- or better;  UWP 001V C- or better or UWP 001Y C- or better or ENL 003 C- or better or COM 001 C- or better or COM 002 C- or better or COM 003 C- or better or COM 004 C- or better or NAS 005 C- or better;  and upper division standing.Not open to students who have taken UWP 104F.
Advanced expository writing common in the health professions, emphasizing effective communication between the writer and different audiences. Topics relate to health, disability, and disease. Suitable for students planning careers in professions such as medicine, dentistry, physical therapy, optometry.
UWP 104I
Writing in the Professions: Internships
UWP 001 C- or better or UWP 001V C- or better or UWP 001Y C- or better or ENL 003 C- or better or COM 001 C- or better or COM 002 C- or better or COM 003 C- or better or COM 004 C- or better or NAS 005 C- or better;  and upper division standing.Open to students concurrently enrolled in an internship and to Contemporary Leadership minors.  
Advanced instruction in writing in the workplace, including public and private sectors, government agencies, profit and non-profit organizations. Collaborative work and practice in effective styles of communication. May be taught abroad.
UWP 104J
Writing in the Professions: Writing for Social Justice
UWP 001 C- or better or UWP 001V C- or better or UWP 001Y C- or better or ENL 003 C- or better or COM 001 C- or better or COM 002 C- or better or COM 003 C- or better or COM 004 C- or better or NAS 005 C- or better;  and upper division standing.
Advanced instruction in writing for Social Justice, using an interdisciplinary approach combining feminist, critical race, ethnic, cultural, and transnational studies; practice in techniques of research and styles of communication for diverse audiences. Suitable for activists in community organizing, non-profits, politics.
UWP 104T
Writing in the Professions: Technical Writing
UWP 001 C- or better or UWP 001V C- or better or UWP 001Y C- or better or ENL 003 C- or better or COM 001 C- or better or COM 002 C- or better or COM 003 C- or better or COM 004 C- or better or NAS 005 C- or better;  and upper division standing.
Communicating effectively about technology and other technical subjects to varied audiences for varied purposes. Suitable for students entering professions that require communicating technical information to subject matter experts, managers, technicians, and non-specialists.   
UWP 106
English Grammar
UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y or ENL 003 or LIN 001 or LIN 001Y;  or Consent of Instructor.
Survey of present-day English grammar as informed by contemporary linguistic theories. The major syntactic structures of English; their variation across dialects, styles, and registers; their development; and their usefulness in describing the conventions of English.  
UWP 110
Specialized Genres in Professional Writing
Satisfaction of the upper division writing requirement.Restricted to upper division students who have satisfied the upper division writing requirement; counts toward the writing minor. 
Instruction in the elements and practices of professional writing in specialized genres. May be taught abroad.
UWP 111A
Specialized Topics in Journalism
Satisfaction of the upper division writing requirement.Restricted to upper division students with a strong interest in journalism; counts toward the writing minor. 
Instruction in the elements and practices of advanced journalism.
UWP 111B
Specialized Topics in Journalism: Investigative Journalism
Satisfaction of the upper division writing requirement.Restricted to upper division students with a strong interest in journalism; counts toward the writing minor. 
Instruction in the elements and practices of in-depth investigative journalism.
UWP 111C
Specialized Topics in Journalism: Science Journalism
Satisfaction of the upper division writing requirement.Restricted to upper division students with a strong interest in journalism; counts toward the writing minor. 
Instruction in the elements and practices of science journalism.
UWP 112A
Introduction to Professional Editing
satisfaction of the upper division writing requirement.Restricted to upper division students who have satisfied the upper division writing requirement; counts toward the writing minor, Group C: Theory, History, & Design.
Introduction to general editing practices and principles, with an emphasis on professional editing in organizational contexts, including academia and the workplace. Extensive practice in copy, comprehensive, and collaborative editing.
UWP 121
History of Scientific Writing
Upper division standing.
History of scientific writing from the 17th century to the present; origins and evolution of scientific genres; role of scientific writing in producing scientific knowledge; discursive differences between disciplines; emergence of English as a global language of science.
UWP 190
Capstone Portfolio Seminar
UWP 100.Open to majors who have completed 135 units.
Capstone course for majors. Synthesis and application of  rhetorical concepts learned in the major. Development of professional digital and print portfolio for graduate school and career applications.
UWP 192
Internship in Writing
UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y or ENL 003;  or equivalent course; consent of instructor.
Internships in fields where students can practice their skills. May be taught abroad.
UWP 197T
Tutoring in Writing
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Tutoring one-on-one or leading small voluntary discussion groups affiliated with a writing course.
UWP 197TC
Community Tutoring in Writing
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Field experience, with individuals or in K-12 classroom instruction, focusing on reading- and writing-to-learn strategies in any subject area.
UWP 198
Directed Group Study
UWP 001 or UWP 001V or UWP 001Y or ENL 003;  or equivalent course; consent of instructor.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.
UWP 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

UWP 220
Rhetorical Approaches to Genre Study
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Using genre theory and methods of analysis to understand and prepare to do research on different types of writing in varying academic and professional contexts. Emphasis on problems in organizational, professional, and/or interdisciplinary communication.
UWP 225
English for International/ESL Graduate Students
Consent of Instructor.
Multi-skills ESL course designed to help international/ESL students improve their English language skills for successful academic study. Emphasis on writing, speaking, listening, reading, and academic culture.
UWP 226
Writing for International Graduate Students
Consent of Instructor.
Focuses on writing needed for academic work, including summaries, critiques, research and grant proposals, memos, resumes, and research papers. Includes a review of grammar needed for writing and some focus on reading skills and American vocabulary and idioms.
UWP 226
Writing for International Graduate Students
Consent of Instructor.
Focuses on writing needed for academic work, including summaries, critiques, research & grant proposals, memos, resumes, and research papers. Includes a review of grammar needed for writing and some focus on reading skills and American vocabulary and idioms.
UWP 250
Writing Assessment
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Examines key testing and measurement concepts; the history of writing assessment; and relationships among writing tests and methods of teaching writing; the impacts of Information and Communication Technology (ICT), and how educational policies both drive and respond to writing assessments.
UWP 270
Literacy & Technology
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Examines how the physical qualities of texts offer different affordances during production and reception; grounds these discussions in the development of literacy practices and writing technologies from ancient to contemporary; creates frameworks for research into literacy, teaching, and textual technologies.
UWP 271
Second Language Writing
Graduate standing.Restricted to graduate standing.
Traces the history of second language writing theory and research on second language writers in a variety of academic and professional contexts. Emphasis on writer characteristics, texts, and contexts. 
UWP 298
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

UWP 299
Individual Study
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

UWP 391
Oral English for ESL Students
Open only to non-native speakers of English with priority enrollment to international student teaching assistants; completion of any required ESL courses or consent of instructor.
Intensive work in oral English for non-native English-speaking students, particularly international student teaching assistants, to increase fluency, accuracy, and use of appropriate discourse strategies in academic settings; e.g., seminar, discussion, laboratory.
UWP 391
Oral English for ESL Students
Open only to non-native speakers of English with priority enrollment to international student teaching assistants; completion of any required ESL courses or consent of instructor.
Intensive work in oral English for non-native English-speaking students, particularly international student teaching assistants, to increase fluency, accuracy, and use of appropriate discourse strategies in academic settings; e.g., seminar, discussion, laboratory.
UWP 392
Teaching Expository Writing
UWP 390;  Graduate standing, appointment as Teaching Assistant in the Composition Program; or the equivalent of UWP 390.
Discussion of problems related to teaching expository writing at the university level, with special emphasis on teaching reading and writing skills and responding to student papers.
UWP 395
Teaching Multilingual Writers
Graduate standing or advanced undergraduate standing; recommended: UWP 390, LIN 1, ENL 106/LIN 106/UWP 106.
Preparing teachers of university-level second language writers, whether in composition courses or courses in other disciplines with a substantial writing component. Suitable for graduate students and advanced undergraduates.
UWP 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.

VEN 090X
Lower Division Seminar
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.
Introduction to current issues surrounding wine and health as they relate to diet, nutrition, and toxicology. 
VEN 101A
Viticultural Practices
VEN 002.
Identification, cultivation, and use of the major wine, table, raisin, and rootstock cultivars. Includes practices specific to the fall such as fruit contracts, maturity sampling, harvesting, cover crops, and soil-pests. One field trip required.
VEN 101B
Viticultural Practices
VEN 002.
Theory, principles, and practices of pruning and grapevine propagation.  Plant materials and the certification process, weed control and weed identification, wood diseases, and frost protection. One field trip required.
VEN 101C
Viticultural Practices
VEN 002.
Field oriented experience in the principles and practices of grapevine production, including vineyard establishment, vine training, trellising, canopy management practices, irrigation and water management, and methods of crop adjustment for improvement of fruit quality. One field trip required.
VEN 110
Grapevine Growth & Physiology 
VEN 002.
Botanical aspects including morphology and domestication will precede lectures covering flower development and energy budget concepts. Impact of physiological variables such as photosynthesis translocation, mineral nutrition, and water relations on fruit ripening and composition will be covered.
VEN 111
World Viticulture
Upper division standing.
Study of the diversity of viticulture, both geographical and historical. History of grape growing and its spread throughout the world will be covered, along with discussions of current viticultural practices in different parts of the world, including California.
VEN 111L
Critical Evaluation of Wines of the World
VEN 111 (can be concurrent);  VEN 111 required concurrently.
Critical analysis of wines produced in different parts of the world with emphasis on the relationship between sensory properties of the wines and factors associated with their place of origin.
VEN 112
Soils in Viticulture
(CHE 002B or CHE 002BH);  (PHY 007B or PHY 009A);  BIS 002A.Open to Viticulture and Enology majors and grad group only or with consent of instructor.
Landscape distribution, physical and chemical processes in viticultural soils. Site evaluation procedures, best soil management practices, vineyard fertilization, and soil health monitoring.
VEN 114
Fermented Foods
BIS 103;  MIC 102;  or Consent of Instructor.Pass One restricted to upper division or graduate level Food Science and Viticulture & Enology majors. 
Physiology, biochemistry, and genetics of microorganisms important in food fermentations. How microorganisms are used in fermentations and how raw materials are converted into finished fermented foods and beverages.
VEN 115
Raisin & Table Grape Production
VEN 002.
Overview of the raisin and table grape industries in California and other production areas of the world. Cultural practices associated with raisin and table grape production will also be discussed.
VEN 118
Grapevine Pests, Diseases & Disorders
VEN 002.
Various pests and diseases of vineyards throughout California. Pest/disease identification and control methods (to include sampling techniques) also will be discussed. Integrated management approach to pest control methods will be emphasized.
VEN 123
Analysis of Musts & Wines
CHE 002C;  PLS 021;  (CHE 008B or CHE 118B or CHE 128B).
Fundamental principles of analytical chemistry as they relate to specific methods used in winemaking.  
VEN 123L
Analysis of Musts & Wines Laboratory
VEN 123 (can be concurrent);  CHE 002C;  PLS 021;  (CHE 008B or CHE 118B or CHE 128B);.Restricted to upper division and graduate students in Viticulture & Enology; others by approval of instructor.
Fundamental principles of analytical chemistry as they relate to specific methods used in winemaking. Laboratory exercises demonstrating various chemical, physical and biochemical methods. Data will be analyzed and results interpreted in weekly lab reports; includes student-designed independent project and written report.
VEN 124
Wine Production
VEN 003;  VEN 123 (can be concurrent);  (BIS 102 or BIS 105).
Principles and practices of making standard types of wines, with special reference to grape varieties used and methods of vinification.
VEN 124L
Wine Production Laboratory
VEN 124 (can be concurrent).Restricted to undergraduates in fermentation science, viticulture & enology, biotechnology, microbiology, food science and applied plant biology majors; to graduate students in food science, agricultural and environmental chemistry and horticulture.
Current technologies used in production of California table wines; analysis and monitoring of impact of fermentation variables on microbial performance and product quality; student-designed independent research project.
VEN 125
Wine Types & Sensory Evaluation
PLS 120 or STA 106.Open to upper division and graduate students in Viticulture & Enology; others by approval of instructor.
Principles of sensory evaluation and application to wines. Factors influencing wine flavor, data from sensory analysis of model solutions. 
VEN 125L
Sensory Evaluation of Wine Laboratory
VEN 125 (can be concurrent).Restricted to upper division major students in fermentation science or viticulture & enology; graduate students in the food science program.
Sensory evaluation of wines and model systems using discrimination tests, ranking, descriptive analysis and time-intensity analysis. Data will be analyzed by appropriate statistical tests and the results interpreted in extensive weekly lab reports.
VEN 126
Wine Stability
VEN 124.Restricted to Viticulture & Enology; Fermentation Science, Applied Plant Biology majors; graduate students in Food Science, Microbiology, Horticulture and Horticulture & Agronomy groups.
Principles of equilibria and rates of physical and chemical reactions in wines; treatment of unstable components in wines by adsorption, ion exchange, refrigeration, filtration, and membrane processes; and protein, polysaccharide, tartrate, oxidative and color stabilities.
VEN 126L
Wine Stability Laboratory
VEN 126 (can be concurrent);  VEN 123L;  and Consent of Instructor.Restricted to upper division Fermentation Science, Viticulture & Enology majors, graduate students in the Food Science, Agricultural and Environmental Chemistry, Microbiology, or by consent of instructor.
Practical application of principles of equilibria and rates of physical and chemical reactions to wine stability.
VEN 127L
Post-Fermentation Wine Processing Lab
VEN 123;  VEN 123L;  VEN 126;  VEN 126L;  VEN 135 (can be concurrent);  or Consent of Instructor.Restricted to upper division or graduate standing. 
Sensory and chemical impact of processing on wines; bench-scale analytical results to make and implement processing decisions; principles and theories of equipment operation and scale-up.
VEN 128
Wine Microbiology
(VEN 123,  VEN 124,  MIC 102,  MIC 103L);  VEN 125, VEN 126 recommended.
Nature, development, physiology, biochemistry and control of yeasts and bacteria involved in the making, aging and spoilage of wine.
VEN 128L
Wine Microbiology Laboratory
VEN 123;  VEN 124;  VEN 128 (can be concurrent);  MIC 103L.Restricted to upper division major students in fermentation science or viticulture & enology; graduate students in the food science program.
Nature, development, physiology, biochemistry and control of yeasts and bacteria involved in the making, aging and spoilage of wine.
VEN 135
Wine Technology & Winery Systems
PLS 021;  MAT 016A;  MAT 016B;  ((PHY 001A,  PHY 001B) or PHY 007A).
Process technologies and process systems that are used in modern commercial wineries. Lectures, demonstrations, problem solving sessions, and possible field trips. Includes grape preparation and fermentation equipment; post-fermentation processing equipment; winery utilities, cleaning systems, and waste treatment.
VEN 140
Distilled Beverage Technology
CHE 008B;  FST 110A.
Distillation principles and practices; production technology of brandy,whiskey, rum, vodka, gin, and other distilled beverages; characteristics of raw materials, fermentation, distillation, and aging.
VEN 181
Readings in Enology
VEN 003.
Critical evaluation of selected monographs in enology. Discussion leadership rotates among the students.
VEN 190X
Winemaking Seminar
VEN 003.Open to Viticulture & Enology majors and graduate students.
Outside speakers on a specific winemaking topic chosen for the quarter. Discussion with the speaker hosted by the faculty member(s) in charge.
VEN 192
Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of 84 units.
Work experience related to Fermentation Science (Enology) or Plant Science (Viticulture) majors. Internships must be approved and supervised by a member of the department or major faculty, but are arranged by the student.
VEN 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Directed group study. May be taught abroad.
VEN 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

VEN 200
Introduction to Scientific Methods
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Processes involved in conducting scientific research. Topics covered will include conducting literature review, formulating hypotheses, and analyzing and reporting results. Students will complete an annotated bibliography and complete a written and oral research proposal.
VEN 210
Grape Development & Composition
(BIS 102,  BIS 103) or BIS 105.
Anatomy, physiology and biochemistry of grape berry development, with emphasis on the development of grape composition relevant to winemaking.
VEN 215
Sensometrics
FST 117;  ((VEN 125,  VEN 125L) or (FST 107A or FST 107B));  Or equivalent to FTS 117.
Experimental design and statistical analysis, including multivariate analysis, for both sensory and instrumental data in enology and food-related studies.
VEN 216
Sustainable Vineyard Development
(VEN 101A,  VEN 101B,  VEN 101C);  (VEN 115 or VEN 118);  or Consent of Instructor.
Application of plant, meteorological, soil, water, GIS, and economic sciences to sustainable vineyard development. Preparation of a comprehensive study to determine the viticultural and economic feasibility of a given site for raisin, table, or wine grape production.
VEN 217
Field & GIS Evaluation of Soils
PLS 120;  (PLS 205 or PLS 206);  (SSC 100 or SSC 105 or SSC 107);  VEN 101C;  Consent of Instructor.  ABT 180 is recommended.
Principles and practices used to evaluate agricultural soils in the field, including soil pits, soil cores, electrical conductivity meters, ground penetrating radar, geomorphology and surface terrain analysis. Use of geographic information sciences, soil databases, digital elevation models and geostatistics.
VEN 219
Natural Products of Wine
VEN 123;  VEN 124;  and Consent of Instructor.  Or natural products background.
Structure, occurrence, and changes due to wine production to the natural products found in wine. Chemicals with a sensory impact will be emphasized, including flavonoids and other phenolics, terpenes and norisoprenoids, pyrazines, oak volatiles and other wine constituents.
VEN 223
Instrumental Analysis of Must & Wine
VEN 123 or FST 103;  ((BIS 102 and BIS 103) or BIS 105), (CHE 107B or CHE 115) recommended.Open to upper division students in Viticulture & Enology, Food Science and Technology; students in Food Science, Ag & Environmental Chemistry and Viticulture & Enology graduate groups. 
Theory and practice of instrumental analysis of wines and musts.  mphasis on the principles of analytical techniques (e.g., CE, GC, HPLC, Mass Spectrometry) and factors determining correct choice of instrumental method.
VEN 224
Advances in the Science of Winemaking
VEN 125;  VEN 126;  or Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Selected topics in the science and technology of winemaking. Topics will be drawn from current research of participating enology and viticulture faculty. Critical analysis of the technical content of published material will be emphasized.
VEN 225
Advanced Sensory Analysis of Wines
((VEN 124,  VEN 125) or FST 107);  AMR 120;  Or the equivalent.
Sensory descriptive analysis experiments will be designed and conducted using standard sensory science methods.Data will be analyzed by analyses of variance, principal component analyses and generalized Procrustes analysis to evaluate the judges performance and interpret the significance of the results.
VEN 235
Winery Design
VEN 124;  VEN 135;  or Consent of Instructor.
Design of wineries. Includes process calculations, equipment selection, process layout and building choice and siting. Project scheduling, capital costs, and ten-year cash flow analysis for the winery. One field trip required.
VEN 270
Critical Evaluation of Scientific Literature
Consent of Instructor.
Contemporary research topics in biological sciences. Discussion of recent research articles in a special topic area chosen by instructor. Intended to develop skills in critical evaluation of scientific publications.  
VEN 290
Seminar
Consent of Instructor.

VEN 290C
Advanced Research Conference
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Planning and results of research programs, proposals, and experiments. Discussion and critical evaluation of original research being conducted by the group. Discussion led by individual research instructors for research group.
VEN 291
Advanced Viticulture
VEN 110;  VEN 116;  VEN 124;  VEN 125;  VEN 210 recommended.
Critical evaluation of scientific and popular literature on selected topics of current interest that relate viticulture to fruit or wine sensory attributes or quality.  
VEN 292
Advanced Internship
VEN 123;  VEN 123L;  VEN 124;  VEN 124L;  VEN 125;  VEN 125L;  VEN 126;  VEN 126L;  VEN 128;  VEN 128L;  and Consent of Instructor.Restricted to Viticulture & Enology Graduate Group graduate students.
Work experience related to Fermentation Science (Enology) or Plant Science (Viticulture) majors. Internships must be approved and supervised by a graduate group faculty member or students major professor, but are arranged by the student.
VEN 297T
Tutoring in Viticulture & Enology
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Designed for graduate students who desire teaching experience, but are not teaching assistants. Student contact primarily in laboratory or discussion sections, and under direction of a faculty member.
VEN 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

VEN 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.

VEN 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Graduate standing.

VET 299
Research
First-, second- and third-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Research
VET 400
Professional & Clinical Skills -- Y1
First-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Outline expectations and skill set required to participate successfully in the DVM curriculum as well as providing learning opportunity in communication, team-building, leadership, conflict management, stress management, critical thinking, professional behaviors, history taking, physical examination skills and medical record keeping.
VET 401
Basic Foundations
First-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Essential basic information regarding histology, general pathology, biochemistry, pharmacology and population health that is foundational to all blocks.
VET 402
Heme/Lymph/Coag
First-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
The lexicon, morphology, production, structure and function of peripheral blood cells, their bone marrow precursors and the lymphoid system, the process and regulation of hemostasis, and the laboratory evaluation of all of these in health and disease. 
VET 403
Musculoskeletal
First-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Anatomy, histology, and physiology necessary for understanding form and function of the bones, joints, muscles, and tendons in producing locomotion; and the pathologic processes that produce typical responses to injury of musculoskeletal structures in domestic animals.
VET 404
Neuroscience/Senses/Behavior
First-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Establish a basis for clinical neurology, ophthalmology, and behavior by providing an integrated study of normal neurobiology, neuroanatomy, neurophysiology, neuropathology, neurpharmacology, neurotoxicology, ophthalmology and behavior.
VET 405
Gastrointestinal/Metabolism
First-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Examine interrelatedness and functions of the organs associated with the gastrointestinal tract.  Applied problems in pharmacology, physical examination, diagnostic testing, and imaging are used to reinforce a basic understanding of organ anatomy, physiology, pathophysiology, and nutrition/metabolism.
VET 406
Pharmacology/Nutrition/Toxicology
Consent of Instructor.  First-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Basic principles of nutrition and toxicology as well as pathophysiologic changes, diagnostic procedures and treatments of nutritional diseases and intoxications of domestic animals and wildlife. Incorporate case examples and directed self-learning to reinforce important concepts.
VET 407
VMTH Rotation -- Y1
First-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Integrate basic and preclinical material working with senior student in a clinical environment.
VET 408
Cardiology/Respiratory
Second-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Normal cardiovascular and respiratory system biology and the integrated response of those systems to injury or disease.
VET 409
Renal/Urinary
Second-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Examine and explore the normal morphology (gross and microscopic), physiology, pathology and imaging of the upper and lower urinary tract in multiple species.
VET 410
Endocrinology/Reproduction
Second-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Anatomy and histology of endocrine glands and reproductive systems in males and females.  Understand the physiology and pathology at the molecular, cellular and organismal level.
VET 411
Skin
Second-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Structure and function of the skin and specialized keratinized structures in veterinary species. Review mechanisms by which skin responds to perturbations and discuss wound healing and skin pathology.
VET 412
Oncology
Second-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Basic mechanisms, etiology, causes and the approach to diagnosis and treatment of cancer with emphasis on veterinary patients.
VET 413
Immunology/Infectious Disease
Second-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Integrate immunology, microbiology, virology, parasitology of common infectious, zoonotic and foreign animal diseases.
VET 414
Population Health
Second-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Principles of evidence-based medicine, study design and inference, and disease transmission in populations. Topics include biostatistics, outbreak investigation and response, diagnostic tests, vaccine strategies, food safety, foreign animal diseases, and impact of environmental health on animals and humans.
VET 415
Clinical Foundations
Second-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Essential concepts that are shared across year three blocks to include foundational material in anesthesia, surgery and emergency medicine with cases that include interpretation of clinical pathology and imaging.
VET 416
VMTH Rotation - Y2
Second-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Integrate basic and preclinical material working with a senior student in a clinical environment.
VET 417
Professional & Clinical Skills -- Y2
Second-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Continue to build on foundations from freshman year in communication, history-taking, client interactions, team-building, conflict and stress management and professional behaviors.
VET 430
Core Stream
Third-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Longitudinal stream to include law, ethics, regulatory medicine, business, communication and disaster medicine.
VET 431
Anesthesia & Surgical Stream
Third-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Introduction to surgical anatomy, operative and anesthetic skills.
VET 432A
Comparative Stream I
Third-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Approach commonly encountered diseases and medical problems across multiple species.  Development of problem-solving skills related to the medical problems of all species from the level of individual animals to groups/herds/populations.
VET 432B
Comparative Stream II
Third-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Approach commonly encountered diseases and medical problems across multiple species. Development of problem-solving skills related to the medical problems of all species from the level of individual animals to groups/herds/populations.
VET 432C
Comparative Stream III
Third-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Approach commonly encountered diseases and medical problems across multiple species. Development of problem-solving skills related to the medical problems of all species from the level of individual animals to groups/herds/populations.
VET 433A
Small Animal Stream I
Third-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Clinical manifestations, diagnostic methods, and the medical and surgical approaches to the infectious, musculoskeletal, neurologic and ophthalmologic diseases of small animals. 
VET 433B
Small Animal Stream II
Third-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Clinical manifestations, diagnostic methods, and the medical and surgical approaches to the dermatologic, dental, and gastrointestinal diseases of small animals as well as preventative medicine and nutrition.
VET 433C
Small Animal Stream III
Third-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Clinical manifestations, diagnostic methods, and the medical and surgical approaches to the cardiorespiratory, endocrine, and urinary medicine as well as diagnosis and therapy of oncologic diseases in small animals. Introduction to companion, avian, and exotic pet medicine and surgery.  
VET 434A
Large Animal Stream I
Third- and/or fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Fundamentals of entry level large animal medicine and surgery to promote development of problem-solving skills for diagnosis, treatment and control of various disease conditions.
VET 434B
Large Animal Stream II
Third- and/or fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Continuation of fundamentals of entry level large animal medicine and surgery to promote development of problem-solving skills for diagnosis, treatment and control of various disease conditions.
VET 435A
Large Animal Stream--Equine Emphasis
Third- and/or fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Fundamental and advanced levels of equine medicine, surgery, lameness and reproduction. Focus on management of individual equids.
VET 435B
Large Animal Stream--Livestock Emphasis
Third- and/or fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Fundamental and advanced levels of livestock medicine and surgery of individual animals and population health. Focus on all livestock species including cattle, sheep, goats, pigs and poultry.
VET 435C
Large Animal Stream--Zoological Medicine Emphasis
Third- and/or fourth-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Taxon- and topic-based approach to learning zoological medicine. Anatomy, physiology, nutrition, management, anesthesia, medicine, surgery and pathology on non-domestic free-ranging and captive species.
VET 436
Companion Small Mammals
Third-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Fundamental understanding of the etiology, clinical presentation, diagnostic evaluation, treatment, prevention, and control of medical diseases of companion small exotic mammals.
VET 437
Reptile & Avian Health
Third-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Organized by organ systems to present reptile and avian health issues. Overview of applied anatomy, physiology and clinical pathology of common species will be provided through laboratory opportunities and discussion of common diseases and treatments. 
VET 438
Poultry
Third-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Introduction to practical poultry medicine. Gross pathology, biosecurity and basic diagnostic tests.  Visits to hatcheries, broiler, layer and turkey farms.
VET 439
Laboratory Animal
Consent of Instructor.  Third-year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Basics of laboratory animal medicine including diseases, medicine, and surgery and comparative biology of the most common species and introduction to regulations. Combination of lecture, wet labs, and projects.
VET 440
Business & Communication
Third- and fourth year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Develop professional communication and business skills that are directly applicable in veterinary clinical practice by actively participating in a wide variety of interactive learning opportunities.
VET 441
Clinical Pathology
Third- and fourth year standing in the School of Veterinary Medicine.
Application of problem-solving and microscopy skills to laboratory data and laboratory specimens.  Sections  to include hematology, immunology, body fluids, exfoliative cytology, urinalysis, microbiology and clinical chemistry data and interpretation.
VMB 092
Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.
Work experience off and on campus in all subject areas offered in the Department of Molecular Biosciences.  Internships supervised by a member of the faculty.
VMB 101V
Principles of Pharmacology & Toxicology
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing in a science major; chemistry through organic chemistry, general biology, or consent of instructor; good standing with the university; computing capability (use MS Word, Excel, PowerPoint, menu driven software programs, Course LMS); own a computer or have ready access to a computer with broadband internet access; NPB 101 and BIS 104 recommended.The course is designed for advanced undergraduate students with interests in pursuing graduate degrees in pharmacology, toxicology, physiological sciences, and for students with an interest in pursuing DVM, MD, Pharmacy, Dentistry and Nursing professional degrees. Students who pursue careers in environmental sciences, public health management, and epidemiology may also benefit from the subject matter presented in this course.
Online course provides training in core concepts of pharmacological and toxicological sciences and prepares to develop higher-order problem solving and critical thinking skills.
VMB 101Y
Principles of Pharmacology & Toxicology
Upper division standing in a science major; chemistry through organic chemistry and general biology, or consent from instructor; good standing with university; computing capability using MS Word, Excel, PowerPoint, menu driven software programs, SmartSite; computer, or ready access to a computer, with broadband Internet access.Restricted to upper division undergraduate students in good standing with school and fulfill course prerequisites.
Hybrid course provides training in core concepts of pharmacological and toxicological sciences. Develop higher-order problem solving and critical thinking skills.
VMB 192
Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of 84 units.
Work experience off and on campus in all subject areas offered by the Department of Molecular Biosciences. Internships supervised by a member of the faculty.
VMB 234
Current Topics in Neurotoxicology
Core courses in one of the following graduate programs: Pharmacology & Toxicology (PTX), Agricultural & Environmental Chemistry (AGC), Biochemistry & Molecular Biology (BMB), Cell & Developmental Biology (CDB), Immunology (IMM), Molecular Cellular & Integrative Physiology (MCP) or Neuroscience (NSC).Restricted to upper level undergraduate students must obtain permission from the course coordinator. 
General principles of neurotoxicology, the cell and molecular mechanisms and health impacts of specific neurotoxicants and the contribution of neurotoxic compounds to complex neurodevelopmental disorders and neurodegenerative diseases.
VMB 253
Metabolism of Toxicants & Drugs
PTX 201;  PTX 202;  PTX 203;  General biochemistry or consent of instructor.
Significance/chemical pathways of toxicants and drug metabolism, enzymology and molecular aspects of P450 and flavin monooxygenases, hydrolases and phase 2 transferases and experimental approaches for metabolism studies.
VMB 254
Toxicology of the Respiratory System
PTX 201;  PTX 202;  PTX 203;  or Consent of Instructor.
Survey of structure and function of the respiratory system, the pathophysiology of major lung diseases, the interactions of toxicants with the lung and response of this organ to injury.
VMB 290
Seminar
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing.
Topics in nutrition, pharmacology/toxicology, and biochemistry.
VMB 297T
Tutoring in Graduate Molecular Biosciences
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate or professional student standing.
Assist in preparation and teaching of courses in Nutrition, Pharmacology and Toxicology, or other courses offered by the department under direct supervision of the instructor. Designed for graduate or professional students who desire teaching experience in graduate courses.
VMB 397T
Tutoring in Molecular Biosciences
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate or professional student standing.
Experience in professional curriculum for graduate or professional students, not teaching assistants, under direct supervision of instructor.
VME 125
Knights Landing One Health Center
Corresponding VME 125L (laboratory portion) required.Enrollment in corresponding VME 125L (laboratory portion) required.
Internship at Knights Landing One Health Center (KLOHC) for undergraduate pre-veterinary student. Application of veterinary and One Health concepts to their work at the center.
VME 125L
Knights Landing One Health Center Lab
VME 125 (can be concurrent).
Internship at Knights Landing One Health Center (KLOHC) for undergraduate pre-veterinary students. Interns may offer technical help, assist with patient registration and records, animal handling, and foreign language interpretation.
VME 158
Infectious Disease in Ecology & Conservation
BIS 002A;  BIS 002B;  BIS 002C;  or equivalent. EVE 100 is recommended.
Introduction to the dynamics and control of infectious disease in wildlife, including zoonotic diseases and those threatening endangered species. Basic epidemiological models and application to field data. Scientists' role in developing disease control policies.
VME 217
Evaluation & Use of Diagnostic Tests
MPM 205 or EPI 205;  Consent of Instructor.Limited to 30 students.
Clinical and epidemiologic properties and application of diagnostic tests for disease, with emphasis on selecting tests; validating, evaluating, and interpreting new tests individually and in aggregate; determining cutoff values; and developing testing strategies.
VME 225
Viral Pathogenesis Seminar/Journal Club
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate student status in the Comparative Pathology, Microbiology or Immunology graduate groups.
Participatory seminar addressing the mechanisms of retroviral pathogenesis in a journal club format. Focus on the review of current scientific journal papers concerning viral pathogenesis, immunology and virology with a special focus on retroviruses.
VME 258
Infectious Disease in Ecology & Conservation
VME 158 must be taken concurrently.
Presentation, analysis and discussion of primary literature on the dynamics and control of infectious disease in wildlife, including zoonotic diseases and those threatening endangered species. Multidisciplinary approach combines perspectives of ecology and veterinary medicine.
VME 298
Group Study
Student in School of Veterinary Medicine or consent of instructor.
Group study in selected areas of the clinical sciences.
VSR 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

VSR 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

VSR 298
Group Study
Consent of Instructor.
Group study. 
VSR 299
Research
Consent of Instructor.

WAS 192
Internship in the UC Davis Washington Program
WAS 193 (can be concurrent);  Junior or senior standing, admission in the UC Davis Washington Program. WAS 193 required concurrently.
Internship in Washington, DC with associated, supervised research project. 
WAS 193
Washington Center Research Seminar
WAS 192 (can be concurrent).
Core academic component of Washington Program. Topics coordinated with internships. Research draws on resources uniquely available in Washington, DC. Supervised preparation of extensive paper.
WFC 092
Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Lower division standing.
Work experience off and on campus in all subject areas offered in thedepartment. Internships supervised by a member of the faculty.
WFC 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.
Special study for undergraduates.
WFC 100
Field Methods in Wildlife, Fish, & Conservation Biology
EVE 101 (can be concurrent) or ESP 100 (can be concurrent);  (BIS 002A,  BIS 002B,  BIS 002C);  and Consent of Instructor.  Or equivalent course of EVE 101 or ESP 100 (can be taken concurrently).
Introduction to field methods for monitoring and studying wild vertebrates and their habitats, with an emphasis on ecology and conservation. Required weekend field trips.
WFC 101
Field Research in Wildlife Ecology
Consent of Instructor.  One upper division course in each of ecology, statistics, and either ornithology, mammalogy, or herpetology.
Field research in ecology of wild vertebrates in terrestrial environments; formulation of testable hypotheses, study design, introduction to research methodology, oral and written presentation of results.  Limited enrollment.
WFC 101L
Field Research in Wildlife Ecology: Laboratory
WFC 101 (can be concurrent);  and Consent of Instructor.Limited enrollment.
Field research in ecology of wild vertebrates in terrestrial environments; testing ecological hypotheses through field research, application of research methodology, supervised independent research projects. Held between Labor Day and fall quarter.
WFC 102
Field Studies in Fish Biology
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division course in each of ecology, aquatic biology, fish biology, and statistics.
Emphasis on theory of quantitative fish capture methods and design of individual research projects on ecology, behavior, physiology or population biology of fishes.
WFC 102L
Field Studies in Fish Biology: Laboratory
WFC 102 (can be concurrent);  and Consent of Instructor.
Field investigations of fish biology are emphasized including quantitative capture methods and individual research projects on ecology, behavior, physiology or population biology of fishes at the field site in relation to their habitats.
WFC 103
Applied Statistics for Wildlife Research
(MAT 016B or MAT 017B or MAT 021B);  (WFC 010 or WFC 050);  or Consent of Instructor.
Introduction to basic statistical concepts and methods as tools for fish and wildlife research. Application of general guiding principles of developing research questions and projects, basic probability theory, statistical estimation (correlation, regression, ANOVA, Chi-square test) and hypothesis testing. Introduction of some specialized analytical techniques, such as population dynamics modeling and time series analysis. 
WFC 110
Biology & Conservation of Wild Mammals
(BIS 002A,  BIS 002B,  BIS 002C);  (EVE 101 (can be concurrent) or ESP 100 (can be concurrent));  Or equivalent course to ESP 100 or EVE 101.
Origins, evolution, diversification, and geographical and ecological distributions of mammals. Morphological, physiological, reproductive, and behavioral adaptations of mammals to their environment.
WFC 110L
Laboratory in Biology & Conservation of Wild Mammals
WFC 110 (can be concurrent);  and Consent of Instructor.Limited enrollment.
Laboratory exercises in the morphology, systematics, species identification, anatomy, and adaptations of wild mammals to different habitats.
WFC 111
Biology & Conservation of Wild Birds
BIS 002A;  BIS 002B;  BIS 002C;  Upper division ecology course recommended.
Phylogeny, distribution, migration, reproduction, population dynamics, behavior and physiological ecology of wild birds. Emphasis on adaptations to environments, species interactions, management, and conservation.
WFC 111L
Laboratory in Biology & Conservation of Wild Birds
WFC 111 (can be concurrent);  and Consent of Instructor.Limited enrollment.
Laboratory exercises in bird species identification, anatomy, molts, age and sex, specialized adaptations, behavior, research, with emphasis on conservation of wild birds. Several weekend field trips, after class bird walks, and independent bird study are required.
WFC 120
Biology & Conservation of Fishes
BIS 002A;  BIS 002B;  BIS 002C;  Upper division ecology course recommended.
Evolution, ecology, and conservation of marine and freshwater fishes.
WFC 120L
Laboratory in Biology & Conservation of Fishes
WFC 120 (can be concurrent);  and Consent of Instructor.Limited enrollment.
Morphology, taxonomy, conservation, and identification of marine and freshwater fishes with emphasis on California species. 
WFC 121
Physiology of Fishes
Upper division courses in nutrition and physiology or consent of instructor.
Comparative physiology, growth, reproduction, behavior, and energy relations of fishes.
WFC 122
Population Dynamics & Estimation
(MAT 016A,  MAT 016B);  (STA 013 or STA 013Y);  (BIS 002A,  BIS 002B,  BIS 002C);  Or the equivalent of STA 013; an upper division course in ecology.
Description of bird, mammal and fish population dynamics, modeling philosophy, techniques for estimation of animal abundance (e.g., mark-recapture, change-inratio, etc.), mathematical models of populations (e.g., Leslie matrix, logistic, dynamic pool, stockrecruitment); case histories.
WFC 124
Sampling Animal Populations
(STA 100 or PLS 120);  (EVE 101 or ESP 100);  or equivalent; upper division standing.
Introduction to major statistical modeling approaches for estimating animal population parameters, including: sample counts, distance sampling, repeated point counts (N-mixture modeling), capture-mark-recapture for closed and open populations, static and dynamic occupancy modeling, and richness estimation. Methods are embedded in the context of obtaining reliable estimates of abundance, survival, occurrence and other ecological parameters for management and conservation. 
WFC 125
Tropical Ecology & Conservation 
EVE 101 or ESP 100.
Ecology and natural history of the tropics. Challenges and opportunities associated with tropical conservation. Design and communicate course-based research project. 
WFC 130
Physiological Ecology of Wildlife
EVE 101 or ESP 100;  (BIS 002A,  BIS 002B,  BIS 002C);  Or equivalent course to ESP 100.
Principles of physiological ecology, emphasizing vertebrates. Ecological, evolutionary, and behavioral perspectives on physiological mechanisms used by animals to adapt to their environment, including consideration of climate-change and other threats to biodiversity. Tropical, temperate, and polar ecosystems are highlighted.
WFC 134
Herpetology
BIS 002A;  BIS 002B;  BIS 002C;  Upper division ecology course recommended.
Evolution and ecology of the worlds diverse reptiles and amphibians. Emphasis on adaptations to environments, species interactions, management, and conservation.
WFC 134L
Herpetology Laboratory
WFC 134 (can be concurrent);  and Consent of Instructor.
Diagnostic characteristics and functional attributes of amphibians and reptiles, emphasizing ecological, bio-geographic and phylogenetic patterns. Field experience with common species of reptiles and amphibians in the Davis area. 
WFC 136
Ecology of Waterfowl & Game Birds
WFC 111;  or Consent of Instructor.  WFC 111L strongly recommended.
Detailed examination of distribution, behavior, population dynamics, and management of waterfowl and upland game birds.
WFC 141
Behavioral Ecology
EVE 101 or ESP 100 (can be concurrent);  (BIS 002A,  BIS 002B,  BIS 002C);  Or equivalent course.
Basic theories underlying the functional and evolutionary significance of behavior, and the role of ecological constraints. Supporting empirical evidence taken mainly from studies of wild vertebrates.  
WFC 144
Marine Conservation Science
Course in introductory ecology.Limited to 30 students.
Key differences between marine and terrestrial ecosystems, major stressors of marine ecosystems (e.g., fisheries, pollution, bioinvasions, climate change and habitat destruction) and their consequences. Laws and agencies responsible for addressing problems, and the policies used.
WFC 150
Urban Wildlife Ecology
BIS 002A;  BIS 002B;  BIS 002C;  Or the equivalent.
Introduction to the behavior, ecology, and evolution of wild animals in urban environments. Effects of urbanization on disease, fitness, and dynamics of animal populations. Conservation and conflict management efforts in urban settings.
WFC 151
Wildlife Ecology
BIS 002B;  Or equivalent.
Ecology of wild vertebrates, including habitat selection, spatial organization, demography, population dynamics, competition, predation, herbivory, energetics, and community dynamics, set in the context of human-caused degradation of environments in North America.
WFC 152
Ecology of Human-Wildlife Conflicts
BIS 002B;  Or equivalent.
Ecological approaches to managing wild vertebrates that come into conflict with agriculture, public health, or the conservation of biodiversity.
WFC 153
Wildlife Ecotoxicology
Introductory courses in organic chemistry, ecology, and physiology, or consent of instructor; ETX 101 recommended.
Various forms of environmental pollution in relation to fish and wildlife, the effects and mechanisms of pollutants, effects on individuals and systems, laboratory and field ecotoxicology, examples/case histories, philosophical/management considerations.
WFC 154
Conservation Biology 
(EVE 101 (can be concurrent) or ESP 100 (can be concurrent));  (BIS 002A,  BIS 002B,  BIS 002C);  Or the equivalent.
Introduction to conservation biology and background to the biological issues and controversies surrounding loss of species and habitats.
WFC 155
Habitat Conservation & Restoration
EVE 101 or ESP 100;  Or the equivalent of ESP 100 or EVE 101; WFC 154 and ENH 160 recommended.
Analysis of the characteristics of wildlife and fish habitats, the conservation of habitats, and restoration. 
WFC 155L
Habitat Conservation & Restoration Laboratory
(EVE 101 or ESP 100);  WFC 155 (can be concurrent);  Or the equivalent of ESP 100 or EVE 101.
Analysis of the characteristics of wildlife and fish habitats, application of restoration methods, and evaluation of conservation and restoration projects in the field. Participate during the term in a restoration project.
WFC 156
Plant Geography
ESP 100 or EVE 101;  PLB 102 or PLB 108 strongly recommended.
Survey of the geographical distribution of vegetation types and habitats, with consideration of the environmental and historical factors that determine these patterns. Conservation and management approaches. Analytical field and lab techniques introduced. 
WFC 157
Coastal Ecosystems
EVE 101;  course work in organismal biology, physical geography, and geology recommended.
Overview of coastal ecosystems, physical and biological elements and processes, and coastal zone dynamics, including sandy, rocky and muddy shorelines, estuaries, dunes and coastal watersheds. Discussion of the role of historical factors and conservation, restoration, and management approaches.
WFC 158
Infectious Disease in Ecology & Conservation
EVE 101 or ESP 100 or VET 409;  Or the equivalent.
Introduction to the dynamics and control of infectious disease in wildlife, including zoonotic diseases and those threatening endangered species. Basic epidemiological models and their applications. Role of scientists in developing disease control policies.
WFC 160
Animal Coloration
BIS 002A;  BIS 002B;  BIS 002C.
Evolutionary and ecological significance of coloration in mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, fish, cephalopods, crustaceans, spiders, insects, humans as well as color in fashion, plants and the military. Topics include history, protective coloration, warning coloration, mimicry, sexual dichromatism and color change.
WFC 168
Climate Change Ecology
BIS 002B;  (EVE 101 or ESP 100);  or Consent of Instructor.
Ecological responses to current and expected future climate change, across levels of biological organization from individuals to ecosystems.
WFC 190
Departmental Research Seminar
Upper division standing in the Biological Sciences.
Reports and discussions of recent advances related to wildlife and fisheries biology.
WFC 191
Museum Science
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.
Principles and methods required to preserve and present biological specimens for research, teaching collections, and museums.
WFC 192
Internship
Consent of Instructor.  Completion of 84 units.
Work experience off and on campus in all subject areas offered in thedepartment. Internships supervised by a member of the faculty.
WFC 195
Field & Laboratory Research
(WFC 110L or WFC 111L or WFC 120L);  (WFC 121 or WFC 130);  EVE 101;  and Consent of Instructor.  Or the equivalent of EVE 101.
Critique and practice of research methods applied to field and/or laboratory environments of wild vertebrates. Work independently or in small groups to design experimental protocol, analyze data, and report their findings.
WFC 197T
Tutoring in Wildlife & Fisheries
Consent of Instructor.  Major in Wildlife, Fish, and Conservation Biology.
Experience in teaching under guidance of faculty member.
WFC 223
Conservation Biology & Animal Behavior
ECL 208 or ANB 221;  and Consent of Instructor.
Influences of concepts of animal behavior (functional, evolutionary, developmental, mechanistic, and methodological issues) on conservation biology theory and practice.
WFC 262
Advanced Population Dynamics
Graduate standing; advanced course in ecology (e.g., EVE 101), population dynamics (e.g., WFC 122), and one year of calculus; familiarity with matrix algebra and partial differential equations recommended.
Logical basis for population models, evaluation of simple ecological models, current population models with age, size, and stage structure, theoretical basis for management and exemplary case histories. Emphasis on development and use of realistic population models in ecological research.
WFC 290
Seminar
Consent of Instructor.
Seminar devoted to a highly specific research topic in any area of wildlife or fisheries biology. Special topic selected for a quarter will vary depending on interests of instructor and students.
WFC 290C
Research Group Conference
Consent of Instructor.
Weekly conference on research problems, progress and techniques in wildlife and fishery sciences.
WFC 291
Seminar in Aquatic Ecology
Graduate standing in Biology.
Presentation and analysis of assigned topics in aquatic ecology emphasizing fish, fisheries and aquatic conservation.
WFC 292
Physiology of Fishes Seminar
Consent of Instructor.  Graduate standing and at least two courses in physiology.
Seminar devoted to current topics concerning the physiological functioning of fishes.
WFC 294
Seminar in Behavioral Ecology of Predators & Prey
Graduate standing.
Presentation and analysis of research papers on social and foraging behavior of predatory animals, antipredator strategies of prey species, co-evolution of predators and prey, and ecology of predator prey interactions.
WFC 295
Seminar in Wildlife Ecotoxicology
Graduate standing in Biology.
Presentation and analysis of assigned and searched research papers on transport, exposure, and effects of environmental contaminants on wildlife-associated ecosystem components, especially at individual/population levels. Specific subjects vary each offering.
WFC 297T
Supervised Teaching in Wildlife & Fisheries Biology
Consent of Instructor.  Meet qualifications for teaching assistant; graduate standing.
Tutoring and teaching students in undergraduate courses in Wildlife, Fish, & Conservation Biology. Weekly conferences with instructor; evaluations of teaching; preparing for and conducting demonstrations, laboratories, and discussions; preparing and grading examinations.
WMS 098
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.

WMS 099
Special Study for Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.

WMS 103
Introduction to Feminist Theory
WMS 050 recommended or consent of instructor.
Introduction to the emergence of feminist theory and to key concepts in feminist theorizing. Examination of past and current debates over sexuality, race, identity politics, and the social construction of womens experience.
WMS 104
Feminist Research
Required for Women's Studies major.
Introduction to feminist applications and transformations of traditional disciplinary research practices;  initial training in methodologies for feminist interdisciplinary work.
WMS 137
Contemporary Debates in Western Feminist Theory
WMS 060;  or Consent of Instructor.
Interpretations of poststructuralist, postmodern, and postcolonial thought from a critical feminist perspective; includes methods of applying theory to concrete social/cultural problems of gender, race, sexuality, class.
WMS 145
Women's Movements in Transnational Perspective
WMS 050 recommended.Limited to 90 students.
Transnational perspectives on 20th- and 21st-century womens movements in Western, colonial and post-colonial contexts, examining movements forms and political orientations and relationships between womens movements and other forces for change.
WMS 146
Gender, War & Peace
Consent of Instructor.
Applies a critical gender perspective to militarism as manifest in contexts of military rule, war, conflict, peacebuilding and security post-conflict. Addresses the changing configurations of gender and sexuality in military institutions and militarized economies and cultures from an interdisciplinary perspective.
WMS 165
Feminist Media Production
(CTS 020 or CDM 020);  or two WMS courses.
Media production as a mode of cultural criticism, furthering feminist/ social justice activist goals. Fundamentals of camera, editing and distribution via a social engagement model. Study and hands-on response to key historic and contemporary feminist and social justice media discourses.
WMS 170
Queer Studies
WMS 070 recommended or consent of instructor.
Study of queer sexualities, identities, theories, practices. Alternative sexualities as historical, social, and cultural constructions in intersections with race, gender, class, nationality. Interdisciplinary exploration of sexual liberation and the regulation of sexuality through history, theory and expressive cultural forms.
WMS 176
Autobiography, Narrative, Memoir
Consent of Instructor.Limited to 30 students.
Life narrative writings by women. Transgressive voices exploring issues of race, class, and sexuality, women's silence and marginalization. Theories of autobiography, autoethnography and memoir included.
WMS 178A
Women Writers & the Transnational Imaginary: The Arab World
Consent of Instructor.
Writings by women from diverse regions and cultures, understood in their cultural, socio-economic, and historical contexts, with each course offering a focus on womens writing in specific geographic/national locations and their diasporas: The Arab World.
WMS 185
Women & Islamic Discourses
WMS 050;  Or comparable course.
Introduction to debate/discourses about women and Islam. Transformations in debate/discourses in colonial and postcolonial periods in the Middle East & South Asia. Comparative study of debate/discourses on family, work, law, sexuality, religion, comportment, human rights, feminist and religious movements.  
WMS 192
Internship in Women's Studies
Completion of a minimum of 84 units and consent of instructor; enrollment dependent on availability of intern positions with priority to Women's Studies majors.
Supervised internship and study in positions/institutional settings dealing with gender-related problems or issues, as for example, a women's center, affirmative action office, advertising agency, or social welfare agency. Final written report on internship experience.
WMS 194HA
Senior Honors Project in Women's Studies
Senior standing, Women's Studies major, and advisor's approval.
In consultation with an advisor, students complete a substantial research paper or significant creative project on a Womens Studies topic.
WMS 194HB
Senior Honors Project in Women's Studies
Senior standing, Women's Studies major, and advisor's approval.
In consultation with an advisor, students complete a substantial research paper or significant creative project on a Women's Studies topic.
WMS 197T
Tutoring in Women's Studies
Upper division standing and consent of director.
Leading small, voluntary discussion groups affiliated with a Womens Studies course.
WMS 198
Directed Group Study
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.

WMS 199
Special Study for Advanced Undergraduates
Consent of Instructor.  Upper division standing.

WMS 200B
Problems in Feminist Research
WMS 200A B+ or better.
Application of feminist theoretical perspectives to the interdisciplinary investigation of a problem or question chosen by the instructor(s).
WMS 250
Cultural Study of Masculinities
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Interdisciplinary approaches to understanding the social and culturalconstruction of masculinities; attention to the effects of biology, gender, race, class, sexual and national identities; criticism of oral, printed, visual, and mass mediated texts, and of social relations and structures.
WMS 299D
Dissertation Research & Writing 
WMS 200A;  WMS 200B;  Fulfillment of course requirements for the DE in Feminist Theory and Research, advancement to candidacy.

WMS 396
Teaching Assistant Training Practicum
Graduate standing.

